No: 2002 -49 
6 June 2002  
 
PRESS RELEASE  
 
 Within the context of compliance with International Accounting 
Standards of our Financial Statements, the following changes are made in 
the presentation of  Balance Sheet starting from May 31, 2002:  
 
1. “Claims under Legal Proceedings” in the assets is reorganized as;  
 
XI. Claims under Legal Proceedings (net)  
A. Claims under Legal Proceedings  
B. Provisions for Claims under Legal Proceedings ( -) 
 
and the provisions for our receivables from Iraq due to the Gulf 
Crisis, which were recorded in “Provisions” in the liabilities, is 
transferred under this item as an offsetting item.   
 
2. To record Income and Expense Accruals as separate items, the 
headings  
 
“XIV. I nterest and Income Accruals”  in the asset side, and  
 
“XIV. Interest and Expense Accruals”  in the liability side  
 
of the balance sheet are introduced, and the accrual amounts in 
the “Other Assets” and “Other Liabilities” are transferred to these 
items.  
 
 
3. In order to present in the balance sheet the financial relations of 
Turkey arising from the membership in the IMF;  
 
a) Reserve Tranche Position of amount SDR 112,775,000 which 
arises from that portion of quota (SDR 964 million) paid as gold and 
foreign exchange by the Treasury will be recorded as  
 
 “II. Foreign Exchange  
A. Convertible  
c. Reserve Tranche Position”  in the assets,  
 
  “II. Liabilities to Treasury  
B. Reserve Tranche Facility”  in the liabilities.  
 
 
b) The allocation of SDR 112,307,000 which is allocated by the IMF 
to Turkey and is used by the Treasury will be recorded as,  
 “XII. Treasury Liabilities due to SDR Allocation”  in the assets 
and,  
“IX. SDR Allocation”  in the liabilities.  
 
 
c) TL accounts  of the IMF in the “Deposits of International 
Institutions” in the liabilities will be presented at current exchange 
rates as of month -ends, in order to reflect to these accounts the 
exchange differences due to the changes in TL/SDR rate.  
 
  
Besides, sinc e May 24, 2002, of Special Finance Houses,  
 
- Free deposits are recorded as;  
 
“IV. Deposits  
 B. Banking Sector  
a. Domestic Banks”  
 
- Required reserves are recorded as;  
 
“IV. Deposits  
 B. Banking Sector  
c. Required Reserves  
i. Cash”  
 
 
 