PRESS RELEASE  
 
       6 February 2002  
BASIC CHARACTERISTICS OF THE INFLATIONARY PROCESS, THE 
INFLATION IN JANUARY, AND FUTURE EXPECTATIONS  
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
It has already been announced in the Statement of January 2nd, 2002 titled 
“Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Policy in 2002 and Prospective Developments” 
that the Central Bank would share its evaluations on inflation outlook with the public 
opinion according to the principle of transparency. We are putting this into practice 
by publishing the first report, which evaluates the inflation of January announced on 
February 3rd, 2002, and the Central Bank’s expectations. Being the first report, the 
following section sheds light on the basic characteristics of inflationary process in 
Turkey. In the third section, some technical aspects regarding price indexes are 
elaborated. The fourth section dwells on the inflation of January 2002 and the 
future expectations on inflation.  
 
II. A BRIEF EVALUATION ON INFLATIONARY PROCESS IN TURKEY  
1. The  following graphic shows the annual inflation rates in the period between 
January 1988 and December 2001.1 There are three underlying characteristics of the 
inflation process that starte d in the mid -Seventies: By international standards, 
Turkey suffers from a quite high inflation. More importantly, the inflation process 
has been going on for a quarter century. Therefore, Turkey has suffered from a high 
and persistent inflation. Secondly, there have been periods when the average 
inflation rate followed a steady course and remained relatively stable. For example, 
between early -1989 and end -1993, mid -1995 and mid -1997, and early -1999 and May 
2000 can be regarded as periods with high but stabl e inflation. This reality denotes 
that a persistent inertia could occur in inflation. Thirdly, the inertia may as well 
disappear suddenly and inflation rate can move sharply either up or down.  
2. Understanding the causes of these three peculiarities is vit al in the fight 
against inflation. At the outset, the main causes of the long -standing and high 
inflation process were high budget deficits and the financing of these deficits 
through the Central Bank. Particularly, the second half of 1970’s and the early 1980’s 
                                                 
1 “Annual inflation rate” is the percentage rate of increase realized in each month’s index values 
according to the same month of the previo us year.  are worth mentioning in this respect. Over time, inflation keeps up its momentum, 
although budget deficits are no longer covered by the Central Bank, as it has been 
the case in most of the 1990’s. Behind this reality are several reasons. However, tw o 
of them are extremely important.  
 
 
3. First, economic agents end up developing some mechanisms to protect 
themselves from long -standing inflation, seeing that past disinflation programs have 
often been interrupted or turned out to be unsuccessful. Generally, these 
mechanisms emerge as a result of backward indexation behavior in which desired 
future income is increased in line with the past inflation. Thus, past inflation rate is 
mirrored into the future.  
4. Second, the budget deficits,  standing at high levels by any international 
standards, or even widening progressively as it was the case in the 1990’s, had to be 
financed increasingly through domestic borrowing considering that external support 
was limited and the Central Bank was no l onger in a position to extend credits to the 
Treasury. Therefore, financial markets should grow in the amount of actual inflation 
rate at least in order to keep the increment in real interest rates under control. In 
other words, past inflation rate was amo ng the factors determining the monetary 
expansion at times when no stabilization program is implemented.  
5. In this process, inflation gets established and develops inertia due to cost 
increases linked to past inflation. Besides backward -looking policies, the widespread 
habits of using foreign currency as an index in setting prices, writing contracts, 
holding savings and borrowing may account for this inertia. Thus, rate of increase of 
exchange rate becomes an important factor determining inflation.  
6. Anot her aspect of this process is that the correlation between budget 
deficits and inflation seems to have been weakened, or even disappeared at all. Table -
1 shows the public sector borrowing requirement to national income ratio, and the 
consumer inflation in the period 1989 -2000. The public sector borrowing requirement 
to national income ratio is also calculated by taken the duty losses of state banks into 
account. Whatever criterion of public deficit is taken, it can be clearly seen that the 
relationship betw een public deficits and inflation has disappeared. Really, is there no 
relationship at all between public deficit and inflation rate?  
7. The answer is “yes, there is no relationship” if we consider the realized 
inflation rates. Yet, the answer turns to “no , there is a relationship” if we consider 
the potential inflation. In economies where budget deficits soar at high level, if there 
exists no policy in place to cut down these deficits and if they are progressively 
financed through domestic borrowing, there  is always a risk for inflation to go up. In 
other words, we may speak of”potential” high inflation equilibrium in such economies. 
For, they become extremely sensitive to sustainability of financing their domestic 
debts, which help reduce the actual inflat ion rate below its potential level. Failure to 
roll over the domestic debt compels such economies to resort to monetization, and 
the actual inflation level may soon reach its potential level. To put it differently, we 
can assert that such economies may bec ome fragile and have a tendency to 
experience crises.  
8. In general, an abrupt rise in inflation rate can materialize simultaneously or 
right after the increase in exchange rate and interest rate. As a matter of fact, 
shortly before the inertia was broken and the inflation rose suddenly (in the first 
half of 1994 and in the wake of the February 2001 crisis) the exchange rate had gone 
up abruptly. It is also interesting to note that, among the underlying reasons why the 
inflation rose rapidly (end -1987, earl y-1988, after April 1994 and in July 1997) are 
huge increments in prices of public goods and services.  Table -1: The Percentage of Public Sector Borrowing Requirement Within the National 
Income (PSBRNI) and the Consumer Inflation (%)  
YEARS  PSBRNI  PSBRNI  including 
Duty Losses  Consumer 
Inflation  
1989  5,3  64,3 
1990  7,4  60,4 
1991 10,2  71,1 
1992  10,6  66,9 
1993  12,0  71,1 
1994  7,9  120,3  
1995  5,0  76,0 
1996  8,6  79,8 
1997  7,7 13,1 99,1 
1998  9,4 15,9 69,7 
1999  15,6 24,2 68,8 
2000  12,5 19,6 39,0 
 
9. In the light of the above -mentioned characteristics, we may conclude that 
the following points are of vital importance for the fight against inflation in Turkey. 
Pursuing tight fiscal and monetary policy will eliminate the risk of an abrupt increase 
in inflation, by making the economy less sensitive to crises and by turning 
expectations into positive. The fiscal  discipline will also constrain the growth in total 
demand and thus contribute to the success in reducing the actual inflation rate. 
Therefore, achieving fiscal and monetary discipline is essential in the fight against 
inflation. The belief that the same d iscipline will continue in the future will also help 
fight inflation. For this reason, the realization of ongoing structural reforms is of 
great importance in order to keep up this discipline.  
10. However, in an economy like Turkey's, where inflation has a  long history, 
expectations and inertia play important roles in the inflationary dynamics , the fight 
against inflation should not be based solely on tight fiscal and monetary policies. The 
more backward -looking behaviors indexed to past inflation is abando ned; the easier 
the fight against inflation can be won. The price setting mechanisms of some public 
goods and services do increase the inertia in the inflation. Such mechanisms must be 
eliminated over time.  11. As mentioned above, the inertia stems mainly from the fact that economic 
agents base their decisions on the past inflation. Avoiding such behaviors depends on 
the success of disinflation programs unless a particular incomes policy is 
implemented. We deem it useful to underline an important point here  by giving an 
example. Let us assume two different “cases” in an economy growing below its 
potential growth rate. In both cases let the inflation target and the economic policies 
pursued towards this target be the same and let these policies be “sound and 
realistic.” However, let us assume in the first case that economic agents demand wage 
increases, set prices for their goods and services, and determine the size of 
corporate balance sheets with the expectation that the future inflation will be no 
different  from the past inflation, despite sound policies. In the second case, let 
decisions be taken in the belief that the inflation target would be hit. It is obvious 
that, in the second case the growth rate and employment will materialize at a higher 
level than  those in the first case, under the assumption that authorities will do 
whatever it takes in order to reach the targeted inflation.  
12. Since sudden hikes in public prices will spur inflation, such increments must 
absolutely be avoided.  
 
III. SOME TECHNICAL ASPECTS REGARDING PRICE INDEXES  
1. Monthly fluctuations of some prices are based much more upon seasonal 
factors than upon economic causes. Therefore, it is useful to pay attention to the 
seasonal ups and downs before evaluating the mov ements in such indexes. In the 
wholesale price index, it is in the agricultural sector that we see the most intensive 
seasonal movements. However, in the private manufacturing industry price index and 
in the public sector price index there is no such an ob vious seasonal fluctuation. The 
seasonal movements in the consumer price index are also important. These movements 
are greater than those in the wholesale price index, but at the same time are lesser 
than those in the agricultural price index. The importan ce of seasonal fluctuations 
may vary in the sub -groups of the consumer price index.  
2. The fact that the price indexes move sometimes freely from economic 
causes cannot be attributed to the seasonal fluctuations alone. Movements in the 
public sector prices  within the wholesale price index may sometimes occur 
independently from economic foundations. Three examples for such movements have 
already been given above. However, considering the long -term averages we may see 
that the price movements of public sector  and private sector are in agreement.  
3. Fluctuations in the consumer price index occur in a narrower band in 
comparison with those in the wholesale and the private manufacturing industry price 
indexes. This reality shows, in a sense, that there is more ri gidity in the consumer inflation. In addition, the movements in the consumer price index bear more 
importance than the other indexes for the people at large.  
4. Basically for these reasons, the movements in the private manufacturing 
industry price index an d in the consumer price index are significant. The rate of 
increase in the private manufacturing industry price index is sometimes called as 
“core inflation.” Movements in this index approximately indicate the fluctuations in 
the core inflation. Likewise, it is also possible to produce a series of “core consumer 
inflation” excluding some of the sub -groups in the consumer price index.  
 
IV. INFLATION IN JANUARY 2002 AND FORWARD -LOOKING 
EXPECTATIONS  
 
IV.1 Inflation in January 2002  
1. Starting from mid -October 2001, the prospects of achieving fiscal discipline 
in 2002, the persistence in structural reforms and the impending additional external 
financing from the IMF have eliminated the concerns about the sustainability of 
domestic debts and have changed economic  expectations into positive. As a result of 
the change in expectations, interest rates declined substantially and the bubble in 
the exchange rate, emerged during the summer 2001, has burst.  
2. The positive development in the exchange rates and interest rat es has 
slowed down monthly price increases. Both increases in the consumer price index and 
in the private manufacturing industry price index in January are below the average of 
the same month in the last years.  
3. In particular, the slowing trend in the pr ivate manufacturing industry 
inflation is remarkable. The present level of inflation in the private manufacturing 
industry, which has been decreasing for the last four months, and the forward -
looking expectations are in conformity with the year -end program  targets. Apart 
from the increase of 1,7 percent in January 2001, which was influenced by the 
currency peg system initiated in 2000, the minimum January realizations in the 
private manufacturing industry inflation between 1988 and 2000 was materialized at 
3,1 percent. The average rate of increase in the private manufacturing industry 
prices in the months of January in this period is 6,2 percent. Therefore, the rate of 
increase of 2,1 percent in the private manufacturing industry prices seems to be low 
and in compliance with the economic fundamentals.  
4. However, the January CPI, which increased by 5,3 percent, seems to be 
above the market expectations and the year -end program target, although being 
below the average of the past period. The average rate of in crease in the CPI in the months of January between 1994 and 2000 is 6,1 percent. Yet, the average between 
1988 and 1993 stood higher.  
5. An analysis of the CPI reveals that the price increases turn out to be very 
different in the sub -groups. For example, t he inflation rates in foods and private 
transportation vehicles have materialized well above the past average inflation rates. 
However, the slowing -down trend observed in the inflation rate in clothing, housing, 
health, entertainment, and restaurant servic es seem to be satisfactory, when 
seasonal factors are taken into account. Such difference shows that behind the 
January consumer price inflation, realized at an unjustifiably higher level, might not 
be a revival in demand. Price increments in agricultural and food sectors resulting 
from adverse weather conditions, and raising the VAT ratios in some sectors and the 
supplemental vehicle purchasing tax ratios, which were reduced in November 2001, to 
their former levels may account for this development in the C PI. However, it is 
observed that the habit of backward -looking price setting still persists both in the 
public and private sector.  
 
IV.2 Expectations  
6. If the future course of inflation were determined by the economic 
fundamentals alone, we could easily s tate for at least three reasons that there would 
not be any problem in reaching the level of 35 percent, which is the consumer 
inflation target for 2002. Firstly, the monetary discipline achieved in 2001 is 
envisaged to continue in 2002 as well, and the gr owth rate of monetary base is 
targeted to be in line with the increase in nominal national income. Secondly, a very 
ambitious budget performance was achieved in 2001 by every international standards 
and it is planned that this performance should continue i n 2002. Thirdly, the Turkish 
Lira has appreciated nominally after the bubble in exchange rate had burst in 
October 2001. As we have announced previously, in the framework of the program 
implemented we expect that the exchange rate will, from now on, tend t o move along 
in harmony with the long -term equilibrium. In short, we expect that the encouraging 
climate we have observed recently on the inflation front will continue in the near 
future, bringing the inflation down drastically.  
7. However, as emphasized i n the second section, one of the basic 
characteristics of Turkey’s inflation is its inertia. In other words, economic decisions, 
which are taken under the influence of backward -looking policies based on past 
inflation, will play an important role in determ ining the future inflation. The 
significance of this role can be matched with the weight of the economic 
fundamentals.  
8. An important standoff could occur from the standpoint of success in 
economic policies and public welfare. Past failures in reaching th e targets will raise question marks such as “Why should this time be different from the previous ones?” 
In fact, economic agents might make their decisions based on past inflation in 
preparing budget for the next period, in demanding wage increases, or in setting 
prices for goods and services. However, it is the “soundness” of economic policies 
against inflation that will make the difference “this time” and convince the public 
opinion that the history would not repeat itself. If economic fundamentals, the m ain 
determinant of inflation, work upon a substantial slowdown in inflation, “backward -
looking” pricing behaviors will distort the relationship between the inflation tendency 
and the economic fundamentals. In other words, although it is possible to obtain much 
better economic results for the society as a whole, it will be difficult to achieve the 
desired results because of enduring “backward -looking expectations.”  
9. As a matter of fact, despite some signs of considerable improvement in 
recent months, expec ted inflation level is still well above the targeted level in the 
program. The Central Bank conducts two separate surveys with the aim of measuring 
the inflation expectations of economic agents. The first one is the Business Tendency 
Survey, which has been  analyzing 500 large -scale firms since December 1987. 
Conducted on a monthly basis, this survey concluded in the second half of January 
that “the expected wholesale inflation rate for the next 12 month -period” stands at 
58,3 percent. The second survey, whi ch has been conducting once in a two weeks since 
3 August 2001, is related to financial sector. According to the results of this survey 
for January, “the expected consumer inflation rate for the next 12 month -period” is 
45 percent. This rate signals a subs tantial decline compared to last four surveys. Two 
surveys conducted in November 2001 showed that the average expected consumer 
inflation rate for the next 12 month -period was 51,5 percent, while those conducted 
in December resulted in 49,5 percent.2 
10. I t is expected that rational economic agents will change their attitudes 
that do not comply with the economic fundamentals. There are two elements that will 
improve inflation expectations in the near future.  
11. The first element is the inflation rates that  will realize in the first months 
of 2002. Nominal appreciation of the Turkish Lira since October 2001 will play an 
important role in keeping the inflation at lower levels in the period ahead. As already 
mentioned, we have begun observing a favorable trend  in the private manufacturing 
industry prices. We expect positive developments to occur in the CPI, once the 
temporary effects of adverse weather conditions and raising the VAT and the 
supplemental vehicle purchasing tax ratios to their former levels are d isappeared, and 
when the domestic demand dynamics are taken into consideration.  
                                                 
2 The results of this survey also will be published soon and regularly, as it is the case in the 
Business Tendency Survey.  
 12. The second element that will reinforce expectations is the approval of two 
laws by the President, which are extremely important for the program. The “Law on 
the Restructuri ng of Debts to the Financial Sector and on the Amendment of Certain 
Laws” numbered 4743, and the “Law on the Tariffs of Goods and Services Produced 
by the Public Enterprises and Institutions and on the Amendment of Certain Laws” 
numbered 4736, which will f acilitate to obtain a primary surplus planned for 2002, 
have been put into effect. Moreover, the IMF Executive Board has ratified the 
credit to be extended to Turkey. In the meantime, the Turkey’s credit rating has 
been revised upward.  
14. The Central Bank  announced at the beginning of 2002 that some 
assumptions on the economic environment had been made in designing the monetary 
and exchange rate policy. These developments have increased the likelihood that the 
said assumptions will materialize. In this con text, we would like to state that the 
Central Bank is in the mood for a cautious optimism for the future inflation.  