No: 2002-97
December 24, 2002

PRESS RELFASE
ON THE FOREIĞN EXCHANGE IİNTERVENTIİON
OF THE CENTRAL BANK

The Central Bank has announced through several press releases that, under the floating
exchange rate regime, the level of exchange rate is determined by supply and demand
conditions in the currency markets, the volatility in the exchange rate is closely observed by
the Central Bank, and the Central Bank may directly intervene in the markets in the event of an
excessive volatility that might occur in both directions. İn this regard, the Central Bank
intervened directİy in the foreign exchange markets in 2002, namely on 11th July and 2nd
December, as a result of the excessive volatility in exchange rates.

Since there has recently been an excessive volatility in exchange rates due to the
ıncreasing concerns over a possible military operation against İrag, the Central Bank has
directly intervened in the markets today by selling foreign currency. As was also the case in the
previous buying and selling interventions, today's intervention should not be interpreted as 1f
the Central Bank were uneasy at the actual level of the Turkish lira.

On the other hand, it should be underlined that, the current economic program that has
been implemented in 2002 had important achievements. İt is expected that in 2002 the CPI will
be realized well below the annual target of 35 percent, and the GNP growth rate will be higher
than expected. The progress made under the current economic program both on the inflation
front and on the sustalinable growth must absolutely keep up its momentum.

n 2003, tight monetary and fiscal policies, which are the main pıllars of the cuürrent
economic program, must be carried on. The continuation of the program with the same
discipline, and without departing from the structural reform process, wıill minimize the cost of
the external shocks on the economy that might be faced during the implementation of the
program. Within this framework, in 2003, the Central Bank will not abandon its inflation target
and wıll continue to put the price stability goal in the forefront.

Moreover, the Central Bank has always argued that financıal stability is the precondition of price stability. As seen in the past implementations, in the event of an external
shock, the Central Bank is always ready to rapidly take measures to meet the Turkish lira and
foreign exchange liguidity needs of the financial system. There is no doubt that the Central

Bank will act in the similar manner to preserve the financial stability in the future.
