No: 2002-36
April 29, 2002

THE CENTRAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY
PRESS RELEASE

A) FOREIGN EXCHANGE BUYING AUCTION PROGRAM FOR MAY 2002

As announced with its press release dated March 28, 2002, the Central Bank
of the Republic of Turkey (CBRT) has decided to increase the level of foreign
exchange reserves via the method of foreign exchange buying auctions, considering
the fact that having stronger reserve position in the medium to long term would boost
the market’s confidence in the existing program, and started foreign exchange buying
auctions as of April 1, 2002.

In the said press release it was also stated that, the aim of the foreign
exchange buying auctions is to enhance the foreign exchange reserve position of the
CBRT at the market rates without targetting any specific exchange rate level, if and
when excess foreign exchange supply situation develops, without creating an
additional volatility in the foreign exchange rates and without disturbing the foreign
exchange positions of banks.

In this respect, during May 2002, the CBRT will continue to hold daily foreign
exchange buying auctions amount of USD 20 million, and there will be 22 foreign
exchange buying auctions excluding US holiday of May, 27. However, different from
the foreign exchange buying auctions methodology of April 2002, an arrangement
has been made. This scheme allows the CBRT to compensate the cumulative foreign
exchange amounts that could not be bought as a result of either no bidding or
insufficient bidding (less than USD 20 million) in an auction, at the following auctions
in May 2002.

Therefore, while other implementations remaining the same, in the ‘Rules for
Foreign Exchange Buying Auction’ section of the Press Release dated March 28,
2002, the following amendments have been made:


During May 2002, foreign exchange buying auctions will be held on each
working day for amount USD 20 million.



However, in order to compensate the cumulative foreign exchange amount
that could not be bought as a result of either no bidding or insufficient
bidding (less than USD 20 million) to an auction during the month, starting
from the following first auction, daily auction amount will be increased to
USD 40 million. In other words, even the cumulative foreign exchange
amount that could not be bought in the previous auctions were more than
USD 20 million, the compensation amount that will be added to the USD 20
million auction amount, will be limited to USD 20 milion.



The amount that will be bought in an auction, including the amount to be
compensated, and the maximum bid price will be posted on the CBRT’s
Reuters page “CBTQ” before the auction.



The maximum amount that could be bid by an institution, including the
amount to be compensated, would be limited to the total amount to be
bought.

B) TURKISH LIRA DEPOSIT BUYING AUCTION PROGRAM FOR MAY
2002

The additional Turkish Lira liquidity, which is created in the system by the
foreign exchange buying auctions, is being sterilised through money market
instruments. Starting from April 2002, to enhance the effectiveness of its sterilisation
efforts, the CBRT, as a supplement to the existing instruments, has started Turkish
Lira Deposit Buying Auctions in the Interbank Money Market with a four week
standard maturity and for a limited amount.

In this respect, considering the foreign exchange buying auctions to be held
and the level of Turkish Lira liquidity, the CBRT has decided to continue its Turkish

Lira Buying Auctions through May 2002, and increased the maximum amount to be
auctioned at each auction from 100 trillion Turkish Liras to 250 trillion Turkish Liras.

C) REPO TRANSACTIONS CONDUCTED WITH THE STATE-OWNED AND
SAVINGS DEPOSIT INSURANCE FUND (SDIF) BANKS

Following the February 2001 crisis, the CBRT began to fund the liquidity
needs of the state-owned and SDIF banks through its repo transactions at the prices
quoted on the ISE (Istanbul Stock Exchange). The upper limit set for the funding for
the needs of the said banks was 7 quadrillion Turkish Liras. However, thanks to the
efficient coordination the banks were able to fund themselves at the ongoing market
interest rates which in turn reduced their borrowing needs from the CBRT.

On February 8, 2002, by using the IMF money, the Treasury made an early
redemption of some portion of the bonds issued to the SDIF banks and with the
funds thus generated the SDIF banks paid their repo debts of 3.7 quadrillion Turkish
Liras to the CBRT. As a result, the CBRT as of February 8, 2002, were able to close
its repo transactions with the SDIF banks.

Starting from February 2002, the state-owned banks gradually reduced their
repo transactions with the CBRT due to their improved liquidity situation mostly
originating from the contribution of the early Treasury redemptions, and finally on
April 17, 2002 they repaid their total borrowings amounting to 300 trillion Turkish
Liras.

Therefore, the short term direct financing of the state-owned and SDIF Banks
by the CBRT started immediately after the February 2001 crisis came to an end.

From now on, the CBRT will conduct its Turkish Lira transactions with the said
banks within the framework of general liquidity management.

