No: 2002 -67  
August 5, 2002  
 
PRESS RELEASE  
 
JULY INFLATION, FORWARD LOOKING EXPECTATIONS AND INTEREST 
RATES  
 
I. GENERAL EVALUATION  
1. In July, consumer prices and wholesale prices increased by 1.4 percent and 2.7 
percent, respectively. While the increase in consumer prices stayed within the 
expected range, the wholesale prices increased beyond the expected level. Annual 
inflation sustained its downward trend and CPI (Consumer Prices Index) inflation 
came down to 41.3 percent and WPI (Wholesale prices Index) i nflation to 45.9 
percent.  
 
2. Disregarding the seasonal factors, deseasonalized CPI and WPI increased by 2.6 and 
3.4 percent, respectively in July.  
 
3. Despite the decline in food and textile prices in July, the rise in the prices of consumer 
durables and communication services played an important role in the course of the 
consumer prices in July. Notwithstanding the favorable developments in the 
agricultural sector, wholesale price inflation accelerated due to upward movements in 
public prices and the depr eciation of Turkish lira. In July, CPI excluding food rose by 
2.2 percent and WPI excluding agriculture by 4.2 percent.  
 
4. The annual inflation trend, computed using 3 month moving average of 
deseasonalized CPI and WPI, was 30,2 and 33,6 respectively.  On th e other hand, 
using the same method, the WPI inflation trend excluding agriculture prices was 45.4 
percent and CPI inflation trend excluding food was 32.8 percent.  
 
 Table 1: General CPI and WPI and sub -items  
 Yearly Change %  Monthly Change %  
 2001  2002  2002  
 July July May  June  July 
CPI 56,3 41,3 0,6 0,6 1,4 
Goods  61,4 43,9 0,1 0,2 0,6 
Services  47,8 36,5 1,6 1,4 3,1 
Excluding Food  58,7 41,0 2,0 2,2 2,2 
WPI  65,4 45,9 0,4 1,2 2,7 
Public  78,6 44,5 2,7 4,3 4,3 
Private  60,5 46,5 -0,4 0,0 2,0 
Private  
Manufacturing  69,2 45,8 1,5 2,8 4,1 
Excluding  
Agriculture  72,6 45,6 1,9 3,4 4,2 
Excluding  
Agriculture and  
Energy  71,1 45,8 2,0 3,5 4,4 
Source: CBRT, SIS  
 
Developments in Consumer Prices:  
5. The adverse effect of the increase in public prices and the depreciation of Turkish lira 
on consumer prices manifested itself in July. An accelerated increase was observed in 
the sub -items excluding food and textiles -- especially in consumer durables and 
services group.  
 
6. The decline in food and textile prices was the most prominent factor con taining further 
increase in CPI. However, the prices of consumer durables comprised of electrical and 
non-electrical devices, cultural and recreational activities and private transportation 
vehicles increased by 5.1 percent due to recent depreciation of Tu rkish lira. Moreover, 
the rise in the prices of communication services, transportation services, health 
services and energy, which are under government control, have had an adverse effect on consumer inflation. The decline in the food and textile prices, h owever, has helped 
to contain the increase in CPI at 1.4 percent level.  
 
7. The 1.1 percent and 3.5 percent decrease in food and textile -shoes sectors, 
respectively, have helped to contain the goods price inflation at 0.6 percent level. 
Induced by the 15. 6 percent rise in communication services prices, 7.5 percent in 
hospital services prices and 4.8 percent in transportation prices, services prices rose by 
3.1 percent. As of July, the annual increase in prices of goods and prices of services 
scored 43.9 pe rcent and 36.5 percent, respectively.  
Figure 1: CPI and CPI Excluding Food  
Annual Percentage Change  Monthly Percentage Change  
(Deseasonalized)*  
  
Source: CBRT, SIS  
*TRAMO/SEATS  Method has been employed for deseasonalization.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Prices of Goods and Services  
Annual Percentage Change  Monthly Percentage Change  
(Deseasonalized)*  
  
Source: CBRT, SIS  
*TRAMO/SEATS  Method has been employed for deseasonalization . 
 
Developments in Wholesale Prices Index  
8. In July, the rise in manufacturing industry prices was the main determinant of the 
increase in WPI. The fact that Turkish lira depreciated nominally against the foreign 
currency basket by 11.5 and 10.4 percent respectively in June and July has underlined 
the increase in manufacturing industry prices. Moreover, the rise in the public sector 
manufacturing industry prices led to an increase in private manufacturing industry 
prices by 4.1 percent.  
 
9. As was the case in June, the main factor restraining further  increase in WPI prices 
other than seasonal factors in July was again the agricultural prices that dropped by 
2.9 percent. The main reason behind the decrease in agricultural prices was low  
domestic demand and excess agricultural supply due to seasonal fa ctors. While 
deseasonalized WPI increased by 3.4 percent in July, increase in deseasonalized WPI 
excluding agriculture was 4.2 percent.  
Figure 3: WPI AND WPI Excluding Agriculture  
Annual Percentage Change  Monthly Percentage Change  
(Deseasonalized)*  
  
*TRAMO/SEATS  Method has been employed for deseasonalization.  
 
II. FORWARD -LOOKING EXPECTATIONS  
 
10. As will be recalled, in the Central Bank’s Press Release dated June 28, 2002, it was 
stated that:  
a) During the period from last autumn up until the emergence of political 
uncertainty, the program had started to produce positive results and the 
general acceptance that this program was the right one to bring stability 
to the Turkish economy became prevalent,  
b) The structural reforms carried out recently had decreased the 
vulnerability of the economy against political uncertainties and external 
shocks,  
c) There is no option other than strictly adhering to the fundamental 
principles of the current program which is bring ing the stability Turkish 
Economy was longing for,  
d) The structural and operational measures have been taken in line with the 
economic program,  
e) Fundamental institutional arrangements have been made owing to the 
structural reforms so as to minimize election -oriented economic policies 
that may jeopardize the sustainability of economic stability,  
f) The Central Bank did not expect the economic program to be interrupted 
by exogenous shocks,  
g) Market sentiment was expected to keep up its positive trend with the 
elimina tion of political uncertainties,  
h) The Central Bank was maintaining its positive outlook for the period 
ahead,  
and it was stated that the perceptions of political uncertainty affected the economic 
expectations and also the foreign exchange rates and interes t rates adversely.  
 
11. Since May, when the political uncertainty emerged, both the interest rates and foreign 
exchange rates have risen and there has been a standstill in the improvement of 
economic expectations .  While the interest rates of the benchmark  Government 
security in the secondary market due April 9, 2003 decreased to 52 percent at the end 
of April,  it soared to 77 percent in June and floated around 75 percent until the end of 
July. Compared to end -April figures, US dollar appreciated by 27 perc ent and Euro by 
38 percent against Turkish lira in July. With the deteriorating expectations, the reverse 
currency substitution that started at the end of 2001 came to halt which also supported 
the increase in foreign exchange rates. The interest rates at the Central Bank’s Turkish 
lira deposit buying auctions with 4 weeks maturity provide important hints about the  
market risk perception. While the average compound interest rate of the Turkish lira 
deposit buying auction held on May 8, 2002 was 61.00 perce nt, the average interest 
rate in the auction dated July 12, 2002 became 67.47 due to the recent uncertainties.  
 
12. According to the CBRT expectations survey, the accelerated downward trend in 
forward -looking inflationary expectations since December 2001, has stopped due to 
the recent developments not directly related to the implementation of the economic 
program. However, recently, despite the depreciation of the Turkish lira and the rise in  
interest rates, which worsened short -term inflationary expectations,  the fact that there 
is no deterioration in the long -term expectations suggests that the points highlighted in 
our press release dated June 28, 2002 have been acknowledged by the markets. The 
results of the public surveys conducted in the second half of Ju ly indicate that the 
expectations are still consistent with the end -year targets and there will be no difficulty in attaining these. Expected inflation for the next 12 months stayed around 
32 percent level in the last two months, exhibiting a flat trend.  
 
13. Establishing confidence in the economic program, stability in foreign exchange and 
Turkish lira markets, appreciation of Turkish lira and implementation of tight 
monetary and fiscal policies as planned have been the key determinants of the price 
develo pments in the January -May period. On the other hand, starting from the second 
half of May, depreciation of Turkish lira has adversely affected the prices in the 
sectors that are relatively more sensitive to developments in foreign exchange  prices.  
Figure 4 : Inflationary Expectations according to the Expectations Survey conducted by 
the Central Bank  
 
Source: CBRT  
 
14. Increases in 
manufacturing industry prices 
sensitive to exchange rate 
depreciation and the increases in 
prices of administered goods 
can indirectly affect the prices 
in other sectors. Therefore, in 
case that the political uncertainty perception prevails and that the foreign exchange 
and Turkish lira markets cannot be stabilized in the short run,  the above -mentioned 
price increases may pose a risk to the success of disinflation.  
 
15. Nevertheless, during last week, there have been some developments that would 
decrease the uncertainties to a great extent. Passing by the Turkish Grand National 
Assembly of the European Union Harmonization Laws that would accelerate Turkey’s 
accession to EU is a development that would provide momentum to Turkey’s 
economic development and affect the expectations of the markets in a positive way. 
Setting the early election d ate as November 3, 2002 has already decreased the 
perception of political uncertainty. Following these two developments that were 
received positively by the markets, both the interest rates on Government Securities 
and the foreign exchange rate have droppe d considerably. While the compound 
interest rate of the Government Securities due April 9, 2003  was around 76 percent at 
the end of July, it dropped down to 68 percent in the operations on August 2, 2002 
with value date August 5, 2002. Similarly, while exc hange rate for 1 US dollar was 
1.690.000 Turkish liras at the end of July, it declined to 1.650.000 on August 2, 2002.  
 
16. While the compound interest rate at the Central Bank’s Turkish lira Deposit Buying 
Auctions with 4 weeks maturity -- one of the risk perc eption indicators in the markets -- 
was 67.47 percent on July 12, 2002, this rate declined to 64.56 percent on August 2, 
2002. These favorable developments are expected to improve forward -looking 
expectations for the economy and to have positive reflections  on inflation in the next 
period.  
 
17. On the other hand, the fiscal and monetary policies as well as structural reforms and 
arrangements are carried out as per the economic program with no hitches whatsoever. 
Indeed, the IMF Board of Directors is expected to convene on August 7, 2002 and 
take up the release of the credit tranche projected to be extended to Turkey.  
 
18. Consequently, as it was stated in our press release dated June 28, 2002, it is obvious 
that the implementation of structural reforms alleviated the  vulnerability of the 
Turkish economy against uncertainties and external shocks.  In addition, in light of the 
following positive developments, it is envisioned that the end -year target of 35 percent 
CPI inflation will be attained: (i) the determination of  the election date would decrease 
the political uncertainty perceptions; (ii) the recent important steps towards accession 
to the European Union would be welcomed by the markets; (iii) the recent upward 
trend in inflation is just a temporary one; (iv) desp ite the distortion in short -term 
inflationary expectations, the long -term inflationary expectations would remain intact; 
and (v) the sizable price increases in most of the goods and services produced by the 
public sector have reduced the State Economic Ent erprises  gaps, and (vi) inflationary 
developments to date and forward looking expectations continue to be in line with the end-year inflation target. Within this framework, Central Bank’s positive view 
explained in the Press Release dated June 28, 2002 sti ll holds.  
 
III. INTEREST RATES OF THE CENTRAL BANK  
 
19. Under the light of the above assessments, Interbank Money Market and İstanbul Stock 
Exchange Repo -Reverse Repo Market short term interest rates have been changed as 
follows as of August 5, 2002:  
a) Overnight Interest rates: Borrowing interest rate has been decreased from 
48 percent to 46 percent, and lending rate has been decreased from 55 percent 
to 53 percent.  
b) Other Maturities: Borrowing interest rate for one week has been decreased 
from 49 perc ent to 46 percent.  
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Within the framework of the Late 
Liquidity Window Facility, the overnight lending interest rate between 16:00 -
16:30 at the Interbank Money Market has been decreased from 65 percent to 
63 percent a nd our borrowing rate of 5 percent remained the same.  