No: 2002 -34 
26th. April, 2002  
BALANCE OF PAYMENTS PRESENTATION FORMAT CHANGE  
 
The international guidelines for the compilation of balance of payments 
statistics are provided in the Balance of Payments Manual (Manual) series issued by 
International Monetary Fund. Such guidelines, to meet changing circumstances were 
published in successive editions. The fifth which is the last edition of the Manual 
mainly addresses the following changes;  
 As a res ult of the liberalization of financial markets, innovations 
regarding financial instruments and growth in the volume of 
international trade in services,  
 The need to achieve harmonization between the Manual and System 
of National Accounts and with statistic al systems pertaining to money 
and banking statistics and government finance statistics,  
 To provide explicit links between the outstanding stock of external 
financial assets and liabilities (International Investment Position) and 
corresponding changes that  occur (Balance of Payments Statistics), 
during specified periods, in these external financial instruments.  
The classification of this Manual differs from those of the fourth edition in a 
number of respects. These changes can be ranked mainly as follows;  
 Current account components are grouped in four main titles: Goods, 
Services, Income and Current Transfers,  
 Current transfers are distinguished from capital transfers, such as 
migrants transfers, which are included in the “Capital Account”.  
 Financial Accoun t also covers the Reserve Assets.  
 Regarding the items under “Financial Accounts”, classifications are 
made according to the type of instrument, by functional breakdown, 
by sector of the domestic creditor for assets and by sector of the domestic debtor for  liabilities. Also for some investments “directional”, 
“asset/liability” and “maturity” breakdowns are provided.  
 At present, in Turkey, the balance of payments statistics are compiled in broad 
conformity with the principles and concepts of The Manual but disseminated in 
Central Bank’s web site with a different presentation format than recommended in 
The Manual which the users in Turkey got familiar with for long years. However, the 
said statistics are reported to IMF and to the other international institut ions in the 
presentation recommended in the Manual.  
In order to provide the comparability of the statistics between the member 
countries’ related statistics, decision has been taken to disseminate henceforth, the 
balance of payments data according to the recommended presentation starting from 
the January 2002 data in the form of  “Analytical Presentation” and “Detailed 
Presention”. Historical data for “Analytical Presentation” and for “Detailed Presention” 
are provided beginning from 1975 and 1984, respect ively.  
However, for comparison purposes, both the old and the new presentations 
will be provided to the users for the 2002 data.  As it can be followed from the figures, 
the new format has only changed the presentation of the data.  
The above mentioned new  presentations are provided in the internet address: 
http://www.tcmb.gov.tr  under the heading: “Publications/Periodical 
Publications/Balance of Payment s Statistics” . 
 