Notes On the Changes in the Questionnaire of Survey of Expectations as of April 2006:
1. Expectation of CPI Inflation
The number of questions regarding consumer inflation has been increased from four to six.
Through this revision, the “expectation of CPI inflation for the following month” has been added
as the third question in the monthly inflation expectations section of the Survey, which already
included the questions about the expectations of CPI inflation for the current month and for the
second month ahead. In the annual inflation expectations section, the “annual CPI expectation
after 24 months” is included in addition to the previous two questions, namely the expectation of
year-end inflation for the current year and the expected CPI inflation over the next twelve
months. For the questions related to the annual inflation expectations in 12 and 24 months, the
beginning and the end of the related periods are stated explicitly in the questionnaire and the
expectations of the interest are the annual inflation rates by the end of the specified 12- and 24month periods.
2. Expectation of the Annual Compound Interest Rate of Treasury Bills
Due to the outstanding stock of floating rate government bonds with quarterly coupon payments,
the Turkish Treasury keeps issuing 3-month-reference Treasury bills. However, as announced in
the 2006 program, floating rate bonds with semi-annual coupon payments will also be issued
regularly each month throughout 2006. Thus, in accordance with the domestic borrowing
strategy of 2006 announced by the Turkish Treasury, questions regarding the annual compound
interest rate of 3-month Treasury bill auctions have been omitted. Instead, the expectations of the
annual compound interest rates of the 6-month Treasury bills to be auctioned 3- and 12-months
ahead are included.
3. Expectation of Annual Compound Interest Rate of Government Bond
In order to assess long-term interest rate expectations, two questions have been added to the
Survey. These questions refer to the interest rate expectations for the 5-year TRY denominated
fixed rate government bonds with semi-annual coupon payments to be auctioned the 3- and 12month periods ahead.
4. Expectation of the Money Market Overnight Annual Simple Interest Rate
Regarding expectations of the money market overnight annual simple interest rate, two questions
inquiring about the expectations for the 3 and 12 month periods ahead have been added to the
Survey, while one of the previous questions regarding the year-end expectation has been omitted.
5. Expectation of US Dollar Rate In The Interbank Foreign Exchange Market
The question related to the expectation of the US dollar rate by the end of the next 12 months is
asked, in addition to the previous two questions.
6. Expectation of the Current Account Balance
There is no change in this question.
7. Expectation of the GNP Growth Rate
The question related to the expectation of the next year’s GNP growth rate has been added to the
Survey.

