No: 2002-89
November 29, 2002

PRESS RELEASE

A) THE CENTRAL BANK ENDS ITS INTERMEDIATION FUNCTION IN
THE INTERBANK MONEY MARKET AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE AND
BANKNOTES MARKETS

As stated in the press release dated January 2, 2002 titled “Monetary Policy and
Exchange Rate Policy in 2002 and Prospective Developments,” the Central Bank started
to phase out its intermediation role both in the interbank money market and the foreign
exchange and banknotes market in 2002. By abandoning its intermediation function, the
Central Bank aims at enhancing the depth of interbank and foreign exchange markets,
enabling the creation of a pricing behavior that fully reflects the risk perceptions. It also
aims at avoiding the transmission of confusing messages to the markets with regard to
monetary and foreign exchange policies, since from time to time some operations
performed in these markets might be perceived as if the Central Bank were the
counterpart.
Within this framework, the Central Bank’s gradual withdrawal from the interbank
money and foreign exchange deposits markets, which started at July 1, 2002, will be
completed as of December 2, 2002. From this date on, the banks’ borrowing limits
(matched transaction limits) from other banks under the Central Bank’s intermediary
function in these markets will be zero.
Termination of the intermediation function of the Central Bank in the interbank money
and foreign exchange markets, will not decrease the amount of Turkish Lira and foreign
exchange liquidity provided for the banks from the Central Bank’s own resources. In

other words, banks’ borrowing limits will be kept the same for transactions with the
Central Bank. Besides, the Central Bank will continue to sterilize excess liquidity via
interbank money market at the announced borrowing rates and without any limit on any
bank.
Within this framework, we deem it important to reiterate the following issues that
have been mentioned in the previous Central Bank announcements.
a) Banks will continue doing transactions within their limits making use of the
Central Bank’s bid rates announced for liquidity sterilization purposes and the
offer rates for providing liquidity in the interbank money market between 10:00
a.m.-04:00 p.m. Moreover, in order to meet the temporary daily liquidity needs in
the system, the Central Bank will continue to provide the “Daylight Overdraft
Limit“ (DOL) facility to banks within their borrowing limits between 09:00 a.m.15:00 p.m.
b) The Central Bank will continue to provide “late liquidity window” facility in the
interbank money market between 04:00 p.m. and 04:30 p.m. as the “lender of last
resort.” Banks’ can borrow from the “late liquidity window” at the Central Bank
lending rate without any limit, and can lend money at the Central Bank borrowing
rate provided that their demands are fully collateralized.
c) The Central Bank will continue to provide TL liquidity to the primary dealers
through open market operations. As known, as of July 22, 2002, the primary
dealers are provided with limited liquidity through open market operations, which
amounts to a maximum of 10 percent of the TL denominated and non-redeemed
Treasury securities that they will purchase from the primary market.
d) As indicated in the previous press releases, the Central Bank expects the markets to
open with excess Turkish lira liquidity for a rather long time. However, in the
event of a temporary Turkish lira liquidity shortage that might occur in the periods
ahead, the Central Bank will begin to inject liquidity through quick repo tenders.

e) In line with the arrangements in the interbank money market, the Central Bank has
been phasing out its intermediation role in the foreign exchange deposits market.
However, the Central Bank will continue performing its intermediation function
limited to the foreign exchange deposits of the state-owned banks that were
transferred from the Saving Deposits Insurance Fund banks in 2001.
f) During the working hours of the foreign exchange deposits market, banks may
borrow foreign exchange deposits from the Central Bank in line with their
borrowing limits.
g) As of December 2, 2002, the Central Bank’s lending rate for EUR and USD
transactions with one-week maturity in the foreign exchange deposits market has
been reduced to 12 percent from 20 percent.

B) TURKISH LIRA DEPOSIT BUYING AUCTIONS PROGRAM FOR
DECEMBER 2002

The Central Bank will continue to conduct Turkish Lira deposit buying auctions in
December with a standard maturity of four weeks that was initiated in April 2002 as a
supplement to its existing instruments with the aim of enhancing the effectiveness of its
efforts to sterilize the excess Turkish lira liquidity in the system.
Similar to the implementation in November, the Central Bank will hold Turkish lira
deposit buying auctions each week on Wednesdays and Fridays and the maximum amount
at each auction will be limited to 200 trillion Turkish liras.
Considering the expected increase in the money demand before the religious
holiday, auctions will not be held on December 4, 2002.

C) FOREIGN EXCHANGE BUYING AUCTIONS

The Central Bank conducted foreign exchange buying auctions between April-June
2002, taking into consideration the reverse currency substitution and the strong balance of
payments position in order to build up the Central Bank reserves with the excess foreign
exchange. However, as stated in the press release dated June 28, 2002, the Central Bank
announced that it suspended these auctions, and will resume only when the necessary
conditions are in place.
There are various comments in the press concerning a resume of foreign exchange
buying auctions. Therefore, it is important to remind what are the necessary conditions to
restart these auctions, which were also announced in the above-mentioned press release.
As stated in the said press release, in case there is an excess supply of foreign exchange
resulting from reverse currency substitution process and strong balance of payments, the
Central Bank will start performing foreign exchange buying auctions. It is highly likely
that these conditions will arise, if the current program is strictly carried out along with the
removal of political uncertainty and with the continuation of positive expectations.
Within this framework, the Central Bank is monitoring and evaluating the
developments in the balance of payments and in the reverse currency substitution process
and will inform the public before starting to hold programmed foreign exchange buying
auctions.

