MONETARY POLICY AND EXCHANGE RATE POLICY IN 2002  
AND PROSPECTIVE DEVELOPMENTS  
 
I. BASIC ASSUMPTIONS ON THE ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT  
1. In designing the monetary policy and the exchange rate policy for the 
period ahead, it is assumed that (i) a fiscal discipline based on a high primary 
surplus will be attained; (ii) long -term commitments regarding fiscal discipline 
and public sector restructuring will be tackled; (iii) banking sector, already 
strengthened by additional measures taken in 2001, w ill be reinforced further; 
the banking reform that was initiated by the Transition Program for 
Strengthening the Turkish Economy will be completed; (iv) economic reforms 
boosting the economic fundamentals and prospects of Turkish economy will 
persist; and (v) concerns on short -term sustainability of government debts will 
be removed through official external financing.  
2. First, it must be underlined that the likelihood of achieving this 
positive economic outlook is very high. This judgment is based on the r ealizations 
in 2001. In 2001, (i) a series of structural reforms was initiated; (ii) by 
international standards an ambitious primary surplus target was announced and 
reached; (iii) a series of measures was taken on banking area, state banks were 
returned t o make profits for the first time over the years. Moreover, the 
November 2000 and The February 2001 crises, and the economic developments 
during the Summer 2001 have clearly showed to everyone what could be the 
consequences of a deviation from reform proce ss or, if this process is halted. 
Experiences in Argentina are full of lessons in this respect. In short, the above -
mentioned assumption for the economic environment, which was an exogenous variable in designing monetary and exchange rate policies, seems t o be a realistic 
assumption in the light of experiences in 2001.  
3. Yet, the experience in 2001 has demonstrated once again that 
correcting economic fundamentals does not always guarantee the success. In the 
period between the February 2001 crisis and Augu st, and the one -month period 
following the attacks on September 11, interest rates remained high and the 
Turkish Lira continued to depreciate despite improvements in the economic 
fundamentals. Thus, concerns were raised about Turkey’s ability to roll over 
domestic debts. As a result, interest rate went further up due to increased risk 
premium, and exchange rate was in an upward trend. These dynamics have 
increased the concerns about the sustainability of domestic debts even further. 
In other words, a self -fulfilling process, feeding on itself, was observed.  
4. For those who monitor the latest theoretical studies in economic 
literature and the country experiences it comes as no surprise that restoring 
economic fundamentals alone does not suffice for reaching the targets. 
Therefore, we announced on 17 August 2001 that similar economic fundamentals 
might generate much different results. This stems from the expectations of 
economic agents. Under similar economic fundamentals, optimistic expectations 
will direct t he economy towards lower interest rate and exchange rate 
equilibrium, while pessimistic expectations will do the opposite. In technical 
terms, there can be more than one equilibrium to be attained at any time in an 
economy.  
5. The developments that started  in the second half of August and ended 
on 11 September 2001, and those experienced since the mid -October 2001 were 
the most obvious evidence in this regard. Particularly in this second period, the 
prospects of achieving fiscal discipline in 2002, the pers istence in structural 
reforms and the impending supplemental reserve facility from the IMF have changed economic expectations into positive. As a result of the change in 
expectations, interest rates declined substantially and the bubble in the 
exchange rat e exploded, to which we have already drawn attention in our earlier 
press releases.  
6. The second basic assumption made in the design of Monetary and 
Exchange rate policies is that, in 2002, we do not expect to experience any 
crisis situation in 2002, whic h distorted the economic expectations despite the 
improvement in economic fundamentals. In fact, the Central Bank has 
contingency plans at hand containing the policy options to be used in case of 
emergency. However, there exist no such shocks in the basic scenario for 2002. 
In particular, we would like to draw your attention to two different shocks. The 
first one is the anxiety on the part of the public concerning the doubt “whether 
the program is going to be shelved” by the authorities responsible for it. We 
have been observing with pleasure since August 2001 that these debates have 
come to an end. The second one is the occurrence of a financial crisis in 
emerging market economies. We must emphasize here that the Argentinean 
economy and the Turkish economy have turned out to be dissimilar from the 
standpoint of fiscal and monetary policy implementations.  
7. In addition, the Central Bank has important tasks for improving the 
economic expectations. This relates to transparency, according to which a 
central ban k should announce the framework of prospective monetary policy, the 
changes in operational rules and the rationale behind the decisions. That is why 
we are making this announcement.  
 II. SHAPING THE EXPECTATIONS  
1. Decisions of economic agents have largel y to do with the future. 
Forecastibility of the future course of interest rate, exchange rate, inflation 
and growth rate will reduce the uncertainties and generate sound decisions. 
Based on this general opinion, we may speak of an “ideal” equilibrium, in w hich 
interest rates, exchange rate, general level prices, and the growth rate may 
remain stable for a long time. Is it possible to reach such state of equilibrium?  
2. It is clear that nobody will object to achieving such equilibrium, apart 
from its repercu ssions on income distribution. What is important is how to 
achieve it. No doubt, in real life, economies do not run under “laboratory 
conditions”, and they are permanently open to shocks to a lesser or greater 
extent. Therefore, it seems more reasonable to  ask the following question. To 
what extent can we come close to this state of equilibrium?  
3. The pre -condition for a stable economy is to have sound economic 
fundamentals. In a country where economic fundamentals are not correct, it will 
never be possibl e to create a stable economic environment no matter what 
monetary policy or exchange rate regime is pursued. Unfortunately, debates 
over the floating exchange rate regime in 2001 have ignored this simple fact. 
Actually, as stated above, on the one hand, wh ile the basic economic 
fundamentals of the Turkish economy are being  put on a right track; on the 
other hand, the poor structures that have led to a disorderly state in the past 
are being transformed permanently in a positive direction.  
4. Undoubtedly, we  may not attain the desired results by emphasizing only 
the tight monetary and fiscal policies and the structural reforms. Expectations 
should not be ignored. One of the main functions of monetary policy is to help 
shape the expectations. In 2002, we have three basic alternatives to be used 
for this purpose. These are: exchange rate anchor, monetary targeting, and inflation targeting. Exchange rate anchor suggests a fixed or a pre -determined 
exchange rate policy. In a looser version of this kind of exchange  rate regime, 
central banks try keeping the exchange rate in a predictable range by frequent 
interventions, even though exchange rate starts losing its function as an anchor. 
In the following section, the exchange rate policy to be pursued in 2002 is 
prese nted. Later, the monetary policy is explained along with monetary targeting 
and inflation targeting.  
 
III. EXCHANGE RATE POLICY  
1. In 2002, the Central Bank will not implement a fixed or managed 
exchange rate regime, nor try to keep an exchange rate level incompatible with 
economic fundamentals. First of all, this is partly so, because it is unrealistic to 
insist on the currency peg regime that was introduced in 2000 and collapsed in 
February 2001, and partly because many countries have, in recent years, 
abandoned these kinds of exchange rate regimes and switched to floating 
exchange rate regimes.  
2. Moreover, we do not see any benefit of pursuing the currency peg 
regime in Turkey under the present conditions. In the first place why is a 
currency peg regime desired or favoured? The answer is simple, but very 
important. Long -standing deficiencies in the economic fundamentals have led the 
economic agents to hold foreign currency, and thus the exchange rate has 
become a significant variable to be taken into acco unt in economic decisions. In 
an environment, where wages and prices are indexed or even fixed to foreign 
currency, major part of savings are held in foreign currency and assets and 
liabilities of balance sheets are denominated in foreign currency, the eco nomic 
structure will be deficient and unsustainable. Such a fragile structure will make 
an economy extremely prone to crises.  3. We must absolutely reverse this trend. This cannot be realized by 
making the exchange rate “predictable” through artificial and  unsustainable 
methods. Restoring economic fundamentals and achieving structural reforms is a 
pre-condition for changing this mechanism. The floating exchange rate regime, 
which will continue to be implemented in 2002, will help overturn this process. In 
2002, the Central Bank’s interventions will be kept at a minimum, just as it has 
been the case since August 2001. The Central Bank will only intervene in 
excessive fluctuations.  
4. It should be borne in mind that, the Treasury’s disbursement of 
financial su pport extended by the IMF for financing budget deficit prompted 
the Central Bank to give Turkish Lira liquidity to markets in a programmed 
manner in 2001. As announced in May 2001, the Central Bank started the planned 
foreign exchange sale tenders in order  to mop up the excess TL liquidity. 
Therefore, the liquidity created by the use of financial support of the IMF was 
withdrawn by using the same support. The liquidity injected this way does not 
have to do with a “monetization,” nor can this withdrawal be r egarded as an 
intervention to keep the exchange rate in a certain level. In other words, the 
IMF extended significant amount of additional external financing in 2001 to 
cover budget deficit. According to the IMF’s internal regulations, the Treasury 
was to utilize this credit by way of the Central Bank. As a result, Turkish Lira 
liquidity that was injected temporarily to the system was mopped up 
immediately. Unfortunately, this simple fact was ignored sometimes and these 
tenders were interpreted as intervent ion in the foreign exchange market. 
Having terminated in December 2001, we may perform tenders again in 2002 if 
the same conditions arise, by making a pre -announcement to the public.  
5. It was rumoured just before and after the Ramadan feast that the 
Central Bank had indirectly intervened in the foreign exchange market by way of state banks to prevent a further drop in exchange rates. However, this was not 
the case. Such indirect intervention would have been in cont radiction with the 
aim of getting economic agents to fully accept the floating exchange rate 
system and ensuring its smooth operation. As can be seen in the countries 
implementing floating exchange -rate-based program, it is quite likely that an 
excess supp ly of foreign exchange could materialize in the economy due to a 
prospective reverse currency substitution and a strong balance of payments 
position, in contrast to 2001. If and when these conditions may prevail, the 
Central Bank will use transparent metho ds destined to increasing foreign 
exchange reserves in compliance with the floating exchange rate regime without 
distorting the long -term trend of exchange rate and its natural equilibrium 
point. Whenever the need to use these methods arises, the measures of the 
Central Bank will be pre -announced simultaneously to the banks and the public 
pursuant to the principle of transparency.  
6. The following point must also be underlined. To say that the economic 
structure based on foreign exchange transactions and fo reign exchange rate has 
to be changed does not mean that the existing set up can be put aside or the 
desired change can be accomplished in a day. On the contrary, the Central Bank 
must accelerate this transformation process as much as possible and make som e 
adjustments when needed.  
7. To this end, we are in the process of making a series of new 
arrangements in the interbank money, foreign exchange and banknotes markets. 
The main purpose of these arrangements, details of which are given in the 
section “Arra ngements for the Operational Framework of Monetary and Foreign 
Exchange Policies”, is to gradually strip the Central Bank of its “intermediary” 
function that was undertaken in the earlier phase of these markets. Thus, 
market participants will be able to be tter evaluate the credit risks they are exposed to, and such risks will be reflected properly on the prices by promoting 
the development of new financial instruments. The fact that the intermediation 
by the Central Bank come to an end will not cause any dr op in the amount of 
liquidity available to the banks using these markets.  
8. With the same purpose, we are planning to initiate forward foreign 
exchange market, in which forward contracts are to be traded. In addition, we 
deem it appropriate to introduce a  new market regarding forward transactions 
based on Turkish Lira interest rate. Measures, envisaged for these markets that 
will lead to smooth operation of floating exchange rate regime, are listed in the 
section “Arrangements for the Operational Framework  of Monetary and Foreign 
Exchange Policies”.  
 
IV. MONETARY POLICY  
1. As explained above, there are two nominal anchors to be used in 2002 in 
order to lessen the future uncertainties and to influence the expectations. 
These are monetary targeting and inflat ion targeting. In 2002, we will begin by 
monetary targeting and at the same time implement a monetary policy focused 
on the “future inflation,” details of which are given below. In other words, this is 
an “implicit inflation targeting.” We will openly swit ch to official inflation 
targeting when necessary conditions emerge later in the year.  
2. Among the monetary aggregates, it is the “monetary base” that we have 
chosen to target. We get the monetary base from the Central Bank’s balance 
sheet. It accounts fo r the net liabilities of the Central Bank toward the other 
institutions and economic agents. Monetary base is the sum of three variables: 
banknotes issued, required reserves denominated in Turkish Lira and free 
deposits. In 2002, monetary base is targeted to increase as much as the growth 
rate of nominal national income. Thus, the annual growth in monetary base will be realized at 40 percent at the end of 2002. Moreover, the monetary base 
becomes a performance criterion in the new Letter of Intent. As is kn own, an 
indicative ceiling was set for monetary base in the program implemented in 2001. 
We made the monetary base a performance criterion because we wanted to cast 
a stronger anchor against inflation. “Net international reserves,” which is 
another perform ance criterion, will not be allowed to fall below a certain limit. 
Another sub -item on the balance sheet, “net domestic assets,” which reflects 
the money created by the Central Bank through domestic credits, will be an 
indicative aggregate.  
3. Disbursement s from the additional external financing to be extended 
by international institutions to the Treasury under the new program will cause 
injection of extra liquidity to the market. In view of the targeted inflation, the 
Central Bank will mop up the excess li quidity in coordination with the Treasury 
by using transparent methods based on market mechanism.  
4. Obviously, there is a close relationship between the target for 
monetary base and the forecast of money demand for 2002. As is the case in all 
forecasts, o ur forecast also contains a margin of error. Our Research 
Department has managed to minimize the margin of error by using modern 
techniques. In particular, the range of forecasting error may change according 
to the size of the reversal in currency substitu tion expected in 2002. 
Therefore, we may have to revise the monetary base growth target in line with 
the reversal in currency substitution in the future. At first glance, the 
likelihood of a revision in an aggregate chosen as a nominal anchor may seem as a  
paradox. However, we can easily demonstrate that there is no such paradox 
when the following two points are taken into account:  
5. First, with monetary targeting we aim to create a monetary expansion 
consistent with the macroeconomic targets, to convince the economic agents that we will never surpass the limits set for monetary base. In other words, we 
will not create excess money supply at all, and will persuade the economic agents 
that there would not be any excess money supply. Reverse currency substitu tion 
means that demand for Turkish Lira will increase against foreign exchange. In 
other words, the money demand will go up under these conditions. Revising the 
monetary base target in the light of increase in demand will not produce excess 
money supply. T here is no probability of generating a higher inflation level than 
the projected one in the program due to this revision.  
6. Second, the Central Bank will use short -term interest rates against 
inflation before switching to inflation targeting policy. In ot her words, although 
some problems might arise in forecasting monetary base demand or the 
relationship between monetary base and inflation may prove to be weak as 
observed in some countries, “implicit inflation targeting” policy will minimize 
these setbacks  and function as an extra anchor. The Central Bank may alter 
short -term interest rate by considering the future course of inflation. Not 
satisfied with a monetary base anchor only, we commit ourselves to take 
additional measures in line with the projected inflation.  
7. We deem it appropriate to highlight an important economic reality that 
is often ignored, in view of the ability of the Central Bank to use short -term 
interest rates more efficiently. In every economy, current inflation rate is the 
accumulatio n of past experiences. Namely, current inflation rate is determined 
by recent cost and demand dynamics along with the expectations of economic 
agents with a time lag. If these factors determining the current inflation rate 
persist in the future, it is no d oubt that the future inflation will be no different 
from the present and the past. In contrast, if there is a strong probability for 
the reversal of these trends, then the likelihood for the future inflation to be 
different from the previous one will be ve ry high. For these reason, central banks aiming to achieve price stability should evaluate the reasons behind the 
past and current inflation, look into their validity in the future, and take 
decisions in accordance with the results of this analysis.  
8. To achieve price stability, the Central Bank bases its monetary policy 
decisions on looking ahead, not on recent developments in the factors 
determining inflation. For this reason, it will be misleading for market 
participants to evaluate the prospects of sho rt-term interest rates of the 
Central Bank by considering the current inflation rate only. For example, the 
inflation rate of a given month may materialize at a high level due to temporary 
developments. However, the movements in factors determining inflati on may 
indicate that inflation would enter into a downward trend and stay there 
permanently. So, trying to predict the Central Bank’s attitude by evaluating the 
current inflation rate only will lead to extremely wrong results.  
9. With a monetary policy, fo cused entirely on the inflation, the Central 
Bank’s opinions for the current rate of inflation and its prospects for the future 
will bear significantly on the public. These evaluations will be announced to the 
public opinion in accordance with the principl e of transparency. The Central Bank 
analysis on monthly inflation rate, and its expectations, based on the Inflation 
Expectation Survey and the Business Tendency Survey, will be made known to 
the public. We expect that the risk of making wrong evaluations stated in the 
above paragraph will be minimized.  
10. We will openly initiate the inflation targeting regime whenever the 
necessary conditions emerge. We had to postpone the introduction of inflation 
targeting due to concerns about the sustainability of dom estic debt. Deepening 
concerns did not allow the short -term interest rates to be used against 
inflation. As stated above, recent positive developments have dropped the 
discussions on the sustainability of domestic debt. With the realization of the economic  environment envisaged for 2001, there will be no place for such 
discussions in 2002. Therefore, the continuation of reform process in 2002 
without interruption and the realization of primary surplus will remove one of 
the obstacles in the way of inflation  targeting.  
11. There are two more factors why this regime has not yet been adopted.  
The first one is the deep -rooted habit of price setting based on past inflation. 
Instead of this backward indexation, when the price setting behaviour based on 
the expect ed inflation becomes very prevalent among the economic agents, the 
inflation targeting will deliver the result that is expected from it. In this 
regard, it is utmost importance that the pricing mechanisms adopted in some 
areas of the public sector must be reduced to a minimum. Undoubtedly, one of 
the hurdles in front of the elimination of these mechanisms is, of course, the 
income loss. However, schemes must be designed so that these losses can be 
compensated. The second is the still strong relationship bet ween the inflation 
and the rate of exchange rate increase.  
12. It is clear that our policy of putting constraints on the growth rate of 
monetary base and “implicit inflation targeting” aims not only to shape inflation 
expectations, but also to try to contr ol the factors affecting domestic demand 
and costs directly and in a way to reduce inflation. Undoubtedly, it is not 
possible to fight inflation by merely using monetary policy. The battle against 
inflation can only be won by achieving fiscal discipline an d by sticking to the 
reformation process with determination. The new three -year program that will 
be initiated in 2002 is comprehensive in this respect and aims to disinflate the 
economy.  
 
 
 V. ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE OPERATIONAL FRAMEWORK OF 
MONETARY AND FOR EIGN EXCHANGE POLICIES  
1. These arrangements are set to determine the Central Bank’s short -
term interest rates, to regulate the Turkish Lira liquidity and to phase out the 
Central Bank’s intermediation in the Interbank Money Market, and the Foreign 
Exchang e and Banknotes Markets. Main elements and framework of these 
arrangements are given below.  
2. With the instrument independence introduced by the new 
legislation in May 2001, achieving price stability has become the Central Bank’s 
primary objective. In thi s context, the main goal of the monetary policy will be 
to reduce inflation in 2002. As mentioned above, the Central Bank will start 
using short -term interest rates against inflation before switching to inflation 
targeting policy. In other words, the Centr al Bank will set the short -term 
interest rates in view of future movements of inflation.  
3. Success in disinflation efforts through short -term interest rates 
can only be obtained if the volatility in short -term interest rates is kept under 
within a narrow band control. To this end, the Central Bank will efficiently 
manage the Turkish Lira liquidity by Open Market Operations, and will regulate 
the Turkish Lira borrowing and lending rates.  
4. Restructuring of the b anking system has been continuing. 
Substantial progress has been achieved in (i) strengthening private banks; (ii) 
prompt liquidation or sale of the SDIF banks; (iii) reformation of state banks; 
and (iv) supervision and regulation of the banking sector. We  believe that these 
efforts will keep up momentum in the period ahead. It is expected in 2002 that 
the economic program, which is reinforced by external financing, will preserve 
the recent improvement observed in financial markets.  5. Pressure on the monet ary policy will be relieved with the 
continuation of strengthening the banking system in 2002. With the 
participation of reinvigorated banks in the Turkish Lira liquidity operations, the 
Central Bank will begin implementing “late liquidity window” facility  in the 
interbank money market between 04:00 pm and 04:30 pm within the framework 
of its function as the “lender of last resort.” The Central Bank will provide 
funding to the banks without any limitation against collateral through this 
facility. What this facility means in practice is that, there will be an appropriate 
environment where a threat of any liquidity squeeze spreading to the banking 
system would not cause a financial instability. On the other hand, if it’s the 
liquidity need of a single bank wit hout being a systemic risk, it will enable the 
public authorities to get informed by the situation earlier and take the 
necessary steps to cope with the problem before spreading to the whole system.    
6. Since February 2001, when floating exchange rate re gime was 
introduced, the volatility in interest rates has diminished considerably. 
Therefore, the conditions for deepening the interbank money market and for 
setting interbank “Turkish Lira reference interest rate” have started to 
emerge. Setting the refer ence interest rate will play an important role in the 
pricing of credits and other financial instruments, including forward foreign 
exchange. Intensive works on reference interest rates are being conducted in 
coordination with the Banks Association of Turk ey. In addition, as mentioned 
before, the measures that have been taken and to be taken in the near future on 
the selling or liquidation of the bulk of SDIF banks, and the strengthening of 
private banking system will enable the Central Bank to gradually en d up its 
intermediation function undertaken in the interbank money and foreign exchange 
markets in 2002.  7. Bringing the Central Bank’s intermediation function to an end 
gradually will not cause any decrease in the amount of Turkish Lira or foreign 
currenc y liquidity provided to the banks via these markets. In other words, the 
banks’ current borrowing limits will continue to be valid. Moreover, as a new 
liquidity facility, banks will be able to borrow unlimitedly from the “late liquidity 
window” being the C entral Bank’s most expensive funding. However, under normal 
conditions and when there is no systemic problem, the “late liquidity window” is 
expected to be used rarely.  
8. Successful implementation of a floating exchange regime requires 
the forward markets , which lessen the future uncertainties. Istanbul Stock 
Exchange introduced the foreign exchange futures market in August 2001. 
Works are underway for removing the obstacles to deepening and developing 
this market. Additionally, we will undertake works in the months to come for 
setting up an organized market, in which interest rate futures contracts will be 
traded.  
9. We think that the interbank markets will benefit from the Central 
Bank’s gradual phasing out of its intermediary role. As can be seen in the 
following timetable for the interbank money and foreign exchange markets, the 
preparations for a gradual transition to leaving the intermediary operations are 
made with extreme care and prudence. Particularly, we thought that the 
restructuring of the banki ng system and the improvement of Turkish Lira money 
and foreign exchange markets would be realized in the first half of 2002 and 
new arrangements are intensified in the second half of 2002.  
10. As a matter of fact, the Central Bank acts as an intermediary in 
the Turkish Lira and foreign exchange markets by assuming the credit risks of 
market participants, due to particular conditions of the period when these 
markets were established. This implementation no longer contributes to the well markets, and creates  distorted pricing mechanisms, in which risk perceptions 
are not fully reflected.  
11. Furthermore, markets may sometimes get the wrong idea about 
transactions carried out among the market participants, as if the Central Bank 
were the counterpart to thereof . This misunderstanding can give rise to wrong 
or mixed signals about monetary and exchange rate policies. Making the 
achievement of price stability its primary objective, the Central Bank must also 
restructure its role in the Turkish Lira and foreign exch ange markets so that its 
monetary policy and exchange rate policy may be better pursued and understood. 
In this context, workings of “Open Market Operations”, “Interbank Money 
Market” and “Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets” at the Central Bank are 
re-arranged as follows.  
 
V.1 Open Market Operations  
12. The Central Bank has long been managing the Turkish Lira liquidity 
mainly through open market operations. Open market operations will continue to 
play a key role in Turkish Lira liquidity operations in 2 002. 
13. In the banking system, the funding facility provided for the state 
banks and SDIF banks through open market operations after the February 2001 
crisis will continue in 2002 within the predetermined limits and as long as it is 
needed. Therefore, the  banks will not have to borrow from overnight market, 
and they will not exert pressure over the short -term interest rates.  
14. We will continue to withdraw the liquidity, given to the state banks 
and the SDIF banks, by reverse repurchase agreements at the Istanbul Stock 
Exchange and by borrowing from them in the interbank money market.  15. In 2002, it is expected that Turkish Lira market will have a positive 
reserve for a long time. However, parallel to the Central Bank’s balance sheet 
developments, when th ere is a need for Turkish Lira liquidity, it will be provided 
through repurchase agreements.  
16. The liquidity management via Open Market Operations will focus on 
making interest rates in money markets converge on the short -term interest 
rates to be set in  line with inflation target.  
 
V.2 Interbank Money Market  
17. The Central Bank will gradually bring its intermediary role in the 
interbank money market to an end starting from 1 July 2002 until 1 December 
2002. However, the Central Bank will continue to per form interbank money 
operations on its own behalf and for its own account, during the conduct of the 
monetary policy.  
18. Although the borrowing limits of the banks will be the same for 
their transactions with the Central Bank, beginning from July 1, 2002,  borrowing 
limits for the transactions among banks will be phased out and will be zero as of 
December 2, 2002 as illustrated in the table below.  
Table  
 
 
DATE BORROWING  
LIMIT FOR 
TRANSACTIONS 
WITH THE 
CENTRAL BANK  
(TRILLION TL)  RATIO (%) TO BE 
USED FROM THE 
TOTAL LIMIT 
AVAILABLE TO 
OPERATIONS 
AMONG BANKS  LIMIT 
AVAILABLE TO 
OPERATIONS 
AMONG BANKS  
(TRILLION TL)  TOTAL 
BORROWING 
LIMIT 
(TRILLION 
TL.) 
01.07.2002  10.0 75 7.5 10.0 
01.08.2002  10.0 60 6.0 10.0 
02.09.2002  10.0 45 4.5 10.0 
01.10.2002  10.0 30 3.0 10.0 
01.11.2002  10.0 15 1.5 10.0 
02.12.2002  10.0 0 0.0 10.0 
 As can be seen on the above table, a bank having a borrowing limit of TL 
10 trillion as of 1 August 2002 will be able to use TL 6 trillion corresponding to 
maximum 60 percent of this limit for the interbank operations among banks. In 
case a bank happens to use TL 6 trillion out of TL 10 trillion e xclusively for its 
interbank operations with other banks, the borrowing limit for the operations 
with the Central Bank will be TL 4 trillion.  
19. The Central Bank will continue to announce its bid rates for liquidity 
sterilisation on the Reuters CBTC page between 10:00 am and 04:00 pm, and 
offer rates in view of providing liquidity to the banks within the borrowing 
limits.  
20. The Central Bank will carry out “late liquidity window” operations in 
the interbank  money market between 04:00 pm and 04:30 pm within the 
framework of its function as the “lender of last resort.” In this period, the 
Central Bank will announce lower bid rates and higher offer rates in comparison 
with those announced between 10:00 am and 0 4:00 pm. Maturity of bid and 
offer rates in the “late liquidity window” will exclusively be overnight. Starting 
from 1 July 2002, banks’ borrowings from the “late liquidity window” will be 
limitless, provided that the operations are collateralised.  
21. The re will be no change in “Daylight Overdraft Limit” facility. Banks 
will be able to continue using this facility between 09:00 am and 03:00 pm within 
their borrowing limits.  
 
V.3 Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets  
 22. In the foreign exchange and bankno tes markets, the Central Bank 
exercises two functions. It acts as intermediary in foreign exchange transactions performed among institutions, and makes transactions in view of 
exchange rate policy, although it has not been utilized in recent months.  
23. The Central Bank will stop its intermediary functions in the foreign 
exchange and banknotes markets in accordance with the following timetable in 
2002.  
MARKETS  DATE 
FX deposits against TL deposits (Swap)  1 March 2002  
Forward FX purchase/sale against TL  1 March 2002  
Foreign banknotes purchase/sale against TL  1 July 2002  
FX purchase/sale against TL  2 September 2002  
FX deposits  1 July 2002 -  
2 December 2002  
 
24. The Central Bank will carry out transactions with institutions on its 
own behalf and for its own account in the markets above -mentioned, in line with 
the exchange rate policy.  
25. The Central Bank will phase out its intermediary role in the foreign 
exchange deposits market starting from 1 July 2002 until 2 December 20 02. 
However, the Central Bank will keep up its intermediary function for the foreign 
exchange deposits of the state -owned banks that were transferred from the 
SDIF banks in November 2001.  
26. Although the Central Bank phases out its intermediary role in 
foreign exchange deposits, the borrowing limits of the institutions will be 
retained. However, The Central Bank would make some adjustments in the 
borrowing limits as before, considering the developments in the banks’ balance 
sheets and financial structures.  
27. Within this framework, for the operations of the Central Bank, the 
borrowing limits in the foreign exchange and banknotes markets will remain the same. However, the limits for the operations exclusively among institutions will 
gradually be reduced and  zeroed as seen in the table given below, starting from 
1 July 2002 until 2 December 2002.  
Table  
 
 
 
DATE BORROWING 
LIMIT FOR 
TRANSACTIONS 
WITH THE 
CENTRAL BANK  
(USD MILLION)  RATIO (%) TO BE 
USED FROM THE 
TOTAL LIMIT 
AVAILABLE TO 
TRANSACTIONS 
AMONG 
INSTITUTIONS  
 LIMIT 
AVAILABLE TO 
TRANSACTIONS 
AMONG 
INSTITUTIONS  
(USD MILLION)  TOTAL 
BORROWING 
LIMIT 
(USD 
MILLION)  
01.07.2002  10 75 7,5 10 
01.08.2002  10 60 6,0 10 
02.09.2002  10 45 4,5 10 
01.10.2002  10 30 3,0 10 
01.11.2002  10 15 1,5 10 
02.12.2002  10 0 0,0 10 
 
As it can be seen from the above table, a bank that has a borrowing limit 
of USD 10 million as of 1 August 2002 will be able to use USD 6 million, 
corresponding to maximum 60 percent of this limit for the transactions among 
institutions. In case an institution happens to use USD 6 million out of USD 10 
million exclusively for its transactions with other institutions , the borrowing 
limit for the transactions with the Central Bank will be USD 4 million.  
28. Moreover, purchase/sale of “foreign exchange against foreign 
exchange,” “foreign exchange against foreign banknotes” and “foreign banknotes 
against foreign banknote s” realized in the foreign exchange and banknotes 
markets are attributed as commercial banking activities performed between the 
Central Bank and institutions operating in the said markets. Although it is 
considered appropriate for the said markets to conti nue activities within the 
Central Bank structure, our policy of encouraging the institutions to organize these operations among themselves outside of the Central Bank will continue in 
2002, since, actually, such activities belong to the commercial banking area.  
29. On the other hand, monitoring financial markets is among the 
Central Bank’s main duties by Law. In 2001, the Central Bank observed the 
foreign exchange and banknotes markets carefully and took necessary measures 
immediately to ensure the efficien cy of the floating rate regime within the 
framework of its Law. The Central Bank will continue to monitor closely the 
foreign exchange markets in the period ahead. In this context, in order to raise 
the operational efficiency of the foreign exchange market s, the Central Bank 
will introduce a monitoring system aiming to better overseeing the volume and 
quality of transactions, and the depth of the foreign exchange market. Once 
effective results are obtained from the monitoring system, the information on 
the depth of the foreign exchange markets will be announced regularly.  
 
VI. PROSPECTIVE MACROECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS IN 2002  
1. Realizing the fact that there can be more than one equilibrium to be 
attained in an economy depending on the expectations, as already stated above 
and in the Central bank press release dated 17 August 2001, is a pre -condition 
for a better understanding of the prospective macroeconomic developments in 
2002. This is not only a theoretical assumption but also an obvious reality, 
especially in countries where domestic debt stock soars at high levels and 
concerns on sustainability of domestic debt are widespread.  
2. This is significant for 2002, as expectations have already started 
turning into positive. Extra foreign currency demand is disappearing at a time 
when expectations have become optimistic and thus exchange rate has stopped 
going up continuously without any economic fundamental, forming a gradually 
growing bubble. In other words, besides the habit of holding f inancial assets in foreign currency due to long -standing deficient economic structure, the extra 
dollarization created by a bubble stemming from pessimistic expectations is 
expected to overturn, as this bubble will burst with the positive expectations. 
As a matter of fact, the positive developments in the last couple of months have 
burst the bubble, as we had previously warned the public.  
3. With the reverse trend of extra dollarization, the residents will tend 
to hold more Turkish Lira financial assets in their portfolios. In other words, 
the demand for Turkish Lira and the supply of foreign currency are expected to 
increase in the next period in comparison with 2001. Therefore, exchange rate 
will likely become more stable. This stability is expected to str engthen reverse 
currency substitution tendency. However, we should not be overoptimistic 
regarding the extent of reverse currency substitution. It is clear that this 
process will spread over time, and will develop only if the policies and reforms, 
which ar e undertaken, are strictly implemented.  
4. The main reasons behind the optimistic expectations in the last couple 
of months of 2001 were; the prospects of a higher primary surplus in 2002, the 
persistence in the restructuring process and the strong likelih ood of obtaining 
additional external support. Keeping promises is the pre -condition for the 
continuation of this positive climate. Furthermore, transparency in monetary 
policy will also contribute to the encouraging atmosphere. Another condition is 
the reh abilitation of the banking system. In this respect, an important step was 
taken in 2001. The policies aiming to further strengthen the financial system 
must be carried on also in 2002.  
5. Under these circumstances, we expect that four important 
development s will boost the economy. First, in 2001, Turkey gained a competitive 
edge that will have a positive impact on exports. Second, with the improving 
banking system, the balance sheets of banks will grow more soundly and there will be a real growth in the cre dit volume over time. Third, the reverse currency 
substitution, and especially the exchange rate stabilization will stimulate 
domestic demand. Within this framework, we presume that part of foreign 
currencies in the hands of the public will turn into deman d for goods. Fourth, 
stability in the financial markets is expected to stimulate the postponed 
investment and consumption expenditures. Accordingly, we expect that the 
Turkish economy will enter into a growth path again. It can be noticed that 
there is a c lose relationship between the realization of these developments and 
the rehabilitation of the banking sector. The banking sector must certainly be 
strengthened in 2002.  
6. At this stage, it will be beneficial to briefly look into the discussions 
regarding the primary surplus targets in 2002, which especially took place in fall 
of 2001. As is known, it has often been asserted that a reduction would have to 
be made in the primary surplus target to put our contracted economy back on 
the growth path. Accordingl y, the economy would be boosted by increasing 
somewhat public expenditures and by reducing tax rates. However, it should be 
borne in mind that in 2001, the main reason behind the increasing tendency in 
the interest rates and exchange rates without any econ omic fundamental was 
the concerns about the sustainability of domestic debt. The widespread 
concerns made the economic environment very risky, expectations turned out to 
be more pessimistic and caused economic agents to postpone their expenditures. 
Consequ ently, the economic contraction, which started after the crises, has also 
been intensified because of these factors.  
7. On the other hand, the increasing tendency of real domestic debt stock 
may raise concerns that the sustainability of domestic debt might  become less 
likely. As known, there are three reasons for real domestic debt to increase: 
high domestic real interest rate, primary budget deficit, and net external debt payment. Within this framework, reducing the primary surplus will cause an 
increase i n real domestic debt stock. At a time when international and domestic 
markets are focused on sustainability of government debt, suggesting a 
decrease in the primary surplus will stimulate concerns over the ability of 
government to roll over its debt. For t his reason, a lesser primary surplus will 
give rise to a higher real interest rate, and a lesser external financing. In other 
words, the three factors that determine domestic debt dynamics will increase 
the domestic debt stock in real terms under these cir cumstances. Undoubtedly, 
the exchange rate will be higher because of the increased risk premium. Under 
these circumstances, reducing the primary surplus will generate just the 
opposite of what is expected from it originally, and will deepen the recession 
even further, let alone reviving the economy. This might have been a remedy in 
different economic conditions. However, at a time when the sustainability of 
domestic debt and program is being questioned, adopting the policy of reducing 
the primary surplus wi ll aggravate the problem.  
8. In 2002, we expect important developments on the inflation front. The 
monetary base anchor will prevent excess money supply, and avoid domestic 
demand pressure beyond the program targets. Moreover, the policy of adjusting 
short -term interest rates in line with the future inflation will help mitigate the 
inflationary pressures. We believe that inflation expectations will turn into 
positive once the reasons behind these policies and the evaluations of the 
Central Bank on inflation  are shared with the public.  
9. For the actual inflation rate to come close to the targeted inflation, 
the backward indexation habits and behaviour, which are very common in all 
sections of the society should be lessened or eliminated altogether. In this 
connection, the Economic and Social Council and the public sector, due to pricing 
policy of the State Economic Enterprises, have important obligations. Getting rid of backward indexation habits and behaviour of corporates and households will 
be depended on the success of the program, unless a specific incomes policy is 
implemented. However, abandoning the backward indexation habits and 
behaviour in the public sector is in the hand of the public sector itself. The 
more this behaviour is abandoned, the closer we come to the targeted inflation.  
10. As mentioned above, the appropriate economic environment that starts 
the reverse currency substitution process, and the process itself will bring 
stability in the exchange rate. Especially in the beginning of this pro cess, the 
Turkish Lira is expected to appreciate in real terms. In fact, in the last quarter 
of 2001 the Turkish Lira did appreciate in real terms. This event also is 
expected to bring the inflation down. Here, with the “real appreciation of 
Turkish Lira”,  it is meant that Turkish Lira will move toward its long -term 
equilibrium level. In considering the whole year 2001, we see that Turkey’s 
competitive edge has not diminished. That is why we have included the external 
demand among the factors enhancing the economic growth.  
11. In 2002, significant developments are expected in terms of exports 
while we will also see increases in imports. There are two main reasons for this. 
First, there is a close relationship between imports and the growth rate. 
Therefore, a s the economy begins to grow it is natural to expect an increase in 
the imports volume. The second reason is the exchange rate stability. As a 
result of these developments, the current account is expected to run into a 
slight deficit.  