No: 2002-43
May 23, 2002

PRESS RELEASE

As it is known, The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey closely monitors all the
developments about banknote counterfeiting, demonstrates a great sensitivity on fighting
against counterfeiting, acts with all the related private and public institutions in a close
cooperation and sometimes makes announcements about the features of the counterfeit notes.

In this context, it is considered to be necessary to make the following statements about
the TL 20.000.000 counterfeit banknote with a serial number of A44 932077, which has been
captured at Ankara Branch on May 16, 2002.

On the analysis, it has been found that the reflections of the indicated counterfeit
banknote under the ultraviolet light had been prevented by a special chemical coating, and
also under the ultraviolet light, the serial number, printed in black on the upper left corner,
reflects in green and the serial number printed in red on the lower right corner, reflects in red,
and the signature of Atatürk and the 12 torch motifs on the ground of the portrait, which can
not be seen with the naked eyes, are imitated by an ink which provides green reflection under
the ultraviolet light.

Additionally,
- Counterfeit banknote is printed by off-set technique on a thinner paper produced
from cellulose, thus has no tactile effects on the obverse and reverse sides.
- As the security thread is imitated by gild ring printing technique, it does not form a
straight line when the counterfeit banknote is held against the light, and has no micro lettering
of “TCMB”.
- The oval figure on the right-hand side of the portrait is imitated by gild ring ink and
does not change its color from goldish yellow to green when the counterfeit is tilted.
- When it is held up to the light, the motifs, which form the emblem of the Central
Bank of the Republic of Turkey, do not combine exactly.

- There is no latent image of the letters “TC” which has to be seen on the brown and
green colored guilloche design at the lower right corner when the note is horizontally or
vertically tilted against light at the eye level.
- There is no micro-lettering of “YİRMİMİLYONTL” clause which has to be in the
denominational numerals of 20 000 000, in the band on the obverse upper right side forming
the ground for the denominational numerals and also no micro-lettering of “TCMB” in the
latitudes and longitudes of the world figure.
- The watermark of the Atatürk portrait is imitated by printing on the reverse side of
the counterfeit note.
- The colored fibers that are visible under ultraviolet light are imitated by printing
techniques and the ones, giving red reflection can also be seen by naked eye.
If this counterfeit is placed in a banknote bundle or package, it may not be detected
easily, but if the other security features such as the quality of the paper, intaglio printing,
security thread, watermark, see through, and optically variable ink are controlled properly, not
only the professionals dealing with cash activities but also all the other people can easily
verify its counterfeit features.
In this respect, as it was emphasized on our previous announcements, it is important to
control not only one security feature of the banknotes but also the other security features to
make sure the authentication of the banknotes.
The detailed information about the security features of our banknotes is on the website
of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (tcmb.gov.tr).

