No:2002- 73

September 03, 2002

PRESS RELEASE

A.

CENTRAL

BANK’S

INVOLVEMENT

IN

THE

PRIMARY

DEALERSHIP PROGRAM

1. The Primary Dealership (PD) System was initiated by the Undersecretariat
of Treasury in May 2000 with the aim of achieving effectiveness in public debt
management, attaining stability in public borrowing, deepening the secondary
markets for government securities and improving the financial system.
However, this program had to be abandoned de facto due to the crisis that broke
out in November 2000, and de jure with the expiration of contracts made with
the primary dealer banks in May 2001. In 2001, the Treasury launched another
study in order to reactivate the PD system and determined its principles. Finally,
the PD System was reintroduced on September 2, 2002.

2. Thanks to the progress in structural reforms in the last one and a half year
period, fundamental institutional arrangements have been realized. Banking
sector reforms carried out by the Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency,
enactment of the Public Borrowing Law that is crucial for the borrowing
discipline and securing clearly of the Central Bank’s independence under the
amended Central Bank Law are among the most important structural
arrangements. In particular, as the Central Bank no longer grants advance to the
Treasury and does not purchase debt instruments issued by the Treasury and
public institutions from the primary market, the transparency of the Central
Bank policies has increased, which in turn enabled the Central Bank to better
express the purposes of its operations to the public.

3. Actually, the Central Bank policies for the past one and a half year have been
carried out within the framework of the price stability goal as stated in its law.
As explained in almost every press release, the primary objective of the Central
Bank’s monetary policy will continue to be attaining price stability and the
Central Bank will avoid all operations and transactions that might be in
contradiction with that objective. While financial stability is the required
supportive goal for the effective conduct of policies to attain price stability,
efficient and sound functioning of the foreign exchange, bond and money
markets is another prerequisite.

4. Regulations adopted by the Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency, and
particularly the banking sector recapitalization scheme, contribute to the
establishment of a sound banking system. Within this framework, the Central
Bank is gradually abandoning its intermediation function in the interbank
money and foreign exchange markets in order to promote development and
deepening in the financial markets and improve the risk assessment capabilities
of the banks.

5. Supporting the establishment of sound and well functioning money and
foreign exchange markets, in which the Central Bank is no longer a
counterparty, is necessary for the stability in financial markets and is concord
with the price stability goal. In fact, in line with its primary objective of price
stability, the Central Bank attaches great importance to the following
arrangements that has contributed or will contribute to the improvement and
stability of the financial markets:
 Undertaking the necessary work for the establishment of a forward
foreign exchange market,
 Giving support for the removal of the tax on foreign exchange sales and
forward transactions,
 Taking part in TRLIBOR arrangements, and supporting thereof,

 Conducting four-week maturity TL deposit buying auctions,
 Conducting quick repo tenders when needed,
 Providing a late liquidity window facility,
 Providing liquidity facility to the banks under recapitalization process
through repurchase transactions in case they face a liquidity shortage.

6. Deepening of the financial markets is vital in improving the effectiveness of
the monetary policy and it is expected that the PD System will also contribute to
the deepening of financial markets. In the same way, TRLIBOR initiated on
August 1, 2002 by the Banks Association of Turkey has resulted in the
formation of benchmark interest rates that the economic agents have been
looking for. The formation of benchmark interest rates is an important
development as they will increase transparency of the markets, form a sound
yield curve in money markets and improve forward transactions by pricing
financial assets more effectively. The primary dealer banks are expected to be
active and to play an important role in TRLIBOR.

7. Therefore, in line with the price stability goal, the Central Bank has decided
to support the PD System and provide a TL liquidity facility for the primary
dealer banks through open market operations. This liquidity facility, which is
actually in contrast with the past quasi-currency board monetary policy, is
consistent with the current monetary policy under the floating exchange rate
regime, whose aim is to adopt inflation targeting. These arrangements are
organized within the framework of open market operations and the Central
Bank is not a counterparty to the contracts to be made between the
Undersecretariat of Treasury and the primary dealer banks.

B.

GENERAL FRAMEWORK OF THE LIQUIDITY FACILITY TO
BE PROVIDED BY THE CENTRAL BANK FOR THE PRIMARY
DEALER BANKS

8. The general framework of the liquidity facility to be provided by the Central
Bank for the primary dealer banks are as follows:

a)

The maximum amount of liquidity to be provided for the
primary dealer banks will be 10 percent of the TL denominated
and not redeemed Treasury securities purchased from the
primary market starting from July 22, 2002 (the net amount of
the TL securities purchased from auctions, public offerings,
TAP sales, noncompetitive sales, second round sales and
switching auctions will be included. FX indexed securities are
excluded).

b)

Banks under the PD program are allowed to conduct repurchase
transactions within this 10 percent limit via quotation method or
they can use at most half of this limit by selling to the Central
Bank these purchased TL denominated securities which are
accepted as the benchmark by the Treasury.

c)

In the said repurchase transactions, the Central Bank will prefer
the quotation method and will determine the interest rates. It is
expected that the current excess liquidity in the markets may last
for a long period of time. Therefore, the short-term money
market interest rates are expected to be around the Central
Bank’s borrowing rates. The Central Bank will determine the
interest rates of repurchase transactions made with the primary
dealer banks taking into consideration the market rates and by
adding a premium to the Central Bank’s borrowing rate, but will

not allow this rate to exceed the average of the Central Bank’s
TL borrowing / selling quotations. The primary dealer banks
will conduct the repurchase transactions between 10:00 – 16:00
hours.

d)

For the outright purchase of benchmark securities from the
primary dealer banks, the Central Bank will prefer to hold
auctions that would better reflect the market conditions. The
primary dealer banks in need of liquidity will give their security
selling offers to the Central Bank. The Central Bank, after
negotiating with the other primary dealer banks, will determine
the relevant benchmark securities to be purchased through
auctions. However, by taking into consideration the market
conditions, the Central Bank can also use the quotation method
in purchasing securities from the primary dealer banks. The
maximum amount of securities to be purchased per day cannot
exceed 20 percent of the total limit for selling securities given to
the primary dealer banks.

e)

Thus, as the liquidity facility provided for the primary dealer
banks is limited, and due to the methods used in these
transactions, the liquidity provided for the primary dealer banks
is not expected to be a continuous funding source and the
interest rates will reflect the market conditions.

f)

The maturities of the repurchase transactions via quotation
method to be conducted with primary dealer banks under the
liquidity facility limits are overnight and one-week. The interest
rates for both of these maturities will be 49 percent, starting
from September 3, 2002.

