June 8, 2002

JUNE INFLATION AND FORWARD LOOKING EXPECTATIONS
I. GENERAL ASSESSMENT
1. In accordance with the economic program being implemented, the downward
trend in consumer prices and wholesale prices sustained in June as well. Compared
to the previous month, Consumer Prices Index (CPI) and Wholesale Prices Index
(WPI) increased by 0.6 percent and 1.2 percent, respectively and the annual CPI
inflation decreased to 42.6 percent and WPI to 46.8 percent. As was the case in May,
the increase in food and agriculture prices in June displayed a downward trend
beyond the seasonal factors (Table 1).
2. The food and agriculture prices, which played an important role in the
downward trend of inflation from February 2002 onwards, led the CPI inflation to
remain below the expectations in June. Increases in housing item in CPI and
manufacturing prices in WPI have been the key factors exerting upward pressure on
prices. The increase in the CPI inflation excluding food stood at 2.2 percent because
of the increases mainly in the housing item and clothing and shoes prices while
increase in the WPI inflation excluding agriculture turned out to be 3.4 percent due to
the increase in manufacturing sector prices.
3. Calculated on a basis of 3-month moving averages of seasonally adjusted data on
WPI and CPI, the annual inflation trend as of June was 24.1 percent in WPI and 25.1
percent in CPI. The annual inflation trend stood at 32.4 percent in WPI excluding
food and 30.6 in CPI excluding agriculture.
Table 1: General CPI, WPI and Sub-items

CPI
Goods
Services
Excluding Food
WPI
Public
Private
Private
Manufacturing
Excluding
Agriculture
Excluding
Agriculture and
Energy
Source: CBRT, SIS

Annual Percentage
Change
2001
2002
June
June
56,1
42,6
60,9
45,8
47,8
36,6
57,3
42,0
61,8
46,8
73,5
44,6
57,4
47,7

Monthly Percentage
Change
2002
April
May
June
2,1
0,6
0,6
2,4
0,1
0,2
1,3
1,6
1,4
2,5
2,0
2,2
1,8
0,4
1,2
2,4
2,7
4,3
1,6
-0,4
0,0

65,9

45,5

1,9

1,5

2,8

68,6

45,0

2,1

1,9

3,4

67,3

45,4

2,1

2,0

3,5

Developments in Consumer Prices
4. In June, CPI showed an increase in all sectors except for the food sector, due to
the depreciation of the TL and upward adjustments in public sector prices.
5. As was the case in May, the lower-than-expected inflation outturn and the decline
in food prices beyond seasonal factors rendered the downward trend in inflation more
prominent in June. The downward trend in food, beverages and tobacco prices that
started in March 2002 sustained its trend and declined by 3 percent in June. The
food, beverages and tobacco prices have been adversely affected by the price
increases imposed upon TEKEL goods. While the decrease in the prices of fresh
fruits and vegetables in June led to a decline in food prices by 4.8 percent, prices of
beverages and tobacco products increased by 5.6 percent and 9.5 percent,
respectively. To sum up, the price increases originating from public sector price
adjustments have been the major factor limiting further decrease in food, beverages
and tobacco products prices. In seasonally adjusted terms, the CPI inflation and the
CPI inflation excluding food rose by 2.5 percent and 2.4 percent, respectively.
Figure 1: CPI and CPI Excluding Food
Annual Percentage Change

Monthly Percentage Change
(Seasonally Adjusted)*

Source: CBRT, SIS
*TRAMO/SEATS method has been used for seasonal adjustment.
6. While a visible slow-down is observed in the increase in the price of goods owing
to the decrease in food prices, the price of services sustained the trend they
exhibited in the last few months. The percentage of increase in the price goods stood
at 0.2 percent. Affected by the 1.9 percent increase in housing rents and 2.2 percent
increase in restaurant, hotel and patisserie prices, the percentage of increase in
services group was 1.4 percent. As a consequence, the annual increase stood at
45.8 percent in goods prices and at 36.6 percent in the price services in June.

Figure 2: Goods and Services Prices
Annual Percentage Change
Monthly Percentage Change

Source: CBRT, SIS
Developments in Wholesale Prices:
7. In June, the factors determining the increase in the WPI inflation were
manufacturing sector prices and agriculture prices that have declined beyond
seasonal movements. Manufacturing sector prices in June were mainly affected by
the price adjustments stemming from the financing needs of the State Economic
Enterprises (SEEs). Moreover, nominal depreciation of the Turkish lira against
foreign exchange by 7.4 percent and 9.5 percent in May and June respectively,
played an important role in the increase in manufacturing sector prices in June.
However, as in May, the pass-through from the exchange rate to prices was limited.
Agriculture prices declined by 5.9 percent in June which arose from the base effect
owing to higher-than-seasonal prices in the beginning of this year, weak domestic
demand and the surplus caused by seasonal factors. To sum up, in June, seasonally
adjusted WPI increased by 2.9 percent and WPI excluding agriculture by 3.1 percent.

Figure 3: WPI and WPI Excluding Agriculture
Annual Percentage Change

Monthly Percentage Change
(Seasonally Adjusted)*

Source: CBRT, SIS.
*TRAMO/SEATS method has been used for seasonal adjustment.
II. OUTLOOK FOR FUTURE
8. According to the Expectations Survey of the CBRT, the end year inflation
expectation of the markets have declined to 34.6 percent in the first half of June,
which was the lowest level of the year. However, according to the survey conducted
in the second half of June, the political uncertainty has led to a slight increase in
inflationary expectations.
9. The inflation data for June has once again shown that the year-end inflation target
is well within reach. The political uncertainty that started in the second half of May
has had a negative impact on the risk premium, thereby adversely affecting the
foreign exchange rates and interest rates. In spite of these developments, the overall
economic program has been very successful in containing inflation.

10. The adverse effects of the shocks engendered by non-economic factors have
been contained by the program that rests upon strong structural reform measures
including the bank restructuring program, the amendments to the Central Bank Law
and the adoption of Public Debt Management Law. However, the persistence of
political uncertainty may obstruct the attainment of program targets by increasing
concerns about the sustainability of the economic policies, thereby increasing the risk
premium. In this regard, the need for carrying out the existing program and the
rationale behind this was announced in the CBRT’s press release dated June 28,
2002.
11. In the forthcoming period, the increase in foreign exchange rates and the lagged
effects of the public price adjustments are likely to exert upward pressure on prices.

This upward pressure, however, is expected to be compensated by the seasonal
decrease in agriculture and food prices. As a consequence, there is no doubt that the
end-year target will be attained provided that the political uncertainty is removed.

Figure 4: End-Year Inflation Expectations according to the CBRT Expectations
Survey

Source: CBRT

