No: 2002-29
8 April 2002

PRESS RELEASE
MARCH INFLATION, FORWARD-LOOKING EXPECTATIONS
AND
INTEREST RATES

I.

GENERAL EVALUATION

1.

The downward inflationary trend that became evident in February has

continued also in March, and the CPI and WPI increased by 1,2 percent and 1,9
percent respectively. Annual inflation figures declined to 65,1 percent in CPI and
77,5 percent in WPI (Table 1).

2.

In addition to the factors that led to a decline in inflation in the last

month, the favorable agriculture and food prices have kept the March inflation
fairly below the expectations. On the other hand, the adverse effect of the
increase in crude oil prices on the public prices and the persistence of rigidity in
service prices have caused the prices (excluding agriculture and food) to rise
higher than February. The CPI (excluding food) increased by 1,6 percent, while
WPI (excluding agriculture) increased by 1,9 percent. Even that, we may see
clearly from these figures that the inflation has entered into a downward trend.

3.

The annual inflation trend - calculated by the de-seasonalized consumer

and wholesale price indexes according to the quarterly moving averages - has
continued its downward trend in March. As of March, the annual inflation trend

has fallen to 39,7 percent in WPI, and 35,5 percent in CPI. The annual inflation
trend is 19,5 in WPI (excluding agriculture) and 43,7 in CPI (excluding food).

Table 1: CPI, WPI and Sub-items
Yearly % Change

CPI
Goods
Services
Excluding Food
WPI
Public
Private
Private Manufacturing
Excluding Agriculture
Excl.Agricul. and Energy

Monthly % Change

2001

2002

2002

2002

2002

March

March

January

February

March

37,5
34,3
43,1
41,7
35,1
31,7
36,3
38,2
35,8
34,7

65,1
77,1
45,3
59,3
77,5
81,2
76,2
75,5
77,5
76,9

5,3
6,4
3,2
3,9
4,2
2,5
4,8
2,1
2,3
1,9

1,8
1,5
2,3
1,3
2,6
0,5
3,3
0,7
0,6
0,7

1,2
0,7
2,2
1,9
1,9
2,0
1,8
1,3
1,6
1,7

Source: CBRT, SIS

Developments in Consumer Prices
4. Strict implementation of the economic program and realization of the
program targets has built up the confidence on the program, and reduced the
risk premium, thereby strengthening the Turkish Lira. The sluggish domestic
demand and the increased inventories for manufactured products have played
an important role on the prices, which has risen lower than expected. In the
light of these developments, economic agents reduced their inflation
expectations.

5.

In the last six-month-period, the food prices, which have been increasing

continuously above the general price index on a monthly basis, decreased by 0,5
percent in March. In the recent months higher food prices as well as the decline
in real wages and in employment rate had partially incited the demand for

substituting goods. We think that these developments have particularly led to
the decline in the prices of processed food in March.

Figure 1: CPI and CPI (Excluding Food)

Yearly % Change

Monthly % Change

Source: CBRT, SIS.
6.

In contrast to the conditions in 2001, monthly price increases in goods

remained below the price increases in services in February and March. Prices in
goods and services increased by 0,7 percent and 2,2 percent respectively in
March. Goods prices (excluding food) rose by 1,5 percent. Price increases in
health, culture-entertainment, financial services and restaurant have negatively
affected the service sector prices.

Figure 2: Goods and Services Prices

Yearly % Change

Monthly % Change

Source: CBRT, SIS.

Developments in Wholesale Prices
7. The agricultural prices, which increased well below the last seven year’s
average, was the main factor determining WPI inflation in March. On the
other hand, especially the price increases in public sector manufacturing
industry due to increased oil prices have affected the WPI negatively in
comparison to February. The price increases in sub-sectors of private
manufacturing industry showed significant variations and the general price
increase was 1,3 percent. The price increases in the clothing, basic metal and
leather products destined to export realized above the general price
increases. Also, the decline in electric-gas prices by 0,1 percent has limited
the increase in WPI.

Figure 3: WPI and WPI (Excluding Agriculture)

Yearly % Change

Monthly % Change

Source: CBRT, SIS.

II.

FORWARD-LOOKING EXPECTATIONS

8.

The price increases in March accelerated the downward trend that had

already become evident in February. The survey results compiled after the
announcement

of

February

inflation

figures

showed

that

inflationary

expectations were gradually approaching to the end-year target (Graph 4). It is
expected that the March price increases, which are below the expectations, will
strengthen this favorable trend.

Figure 4: Year-end Inflation Expectations According to the CBRT
Survey of Expectations

Source: CBRT.

9 .

Strict implementation of the current economic program will prevent the

supply and demand side inflationary pressures and will contribute to the
acceleration of downward trend in inflation in the period ahead. In this
context, if conducted in line with the inflation target, the incomes policy and
the pricing policy of public and private sectors will be among the main
contributing factors to meeting the end-year inflation target without causing
any loss in output.

10.

The stability in foreign exchange rates, the resumption of public sector

price increases in line with the inflation target will affect positively the
production costs and expectations and will contribute to the realization of yearend inflation target. Despite all these favorable developments, the likelihood of
persistence in crude oil price increases in international markets, and rigidity in
the service sector prices are the risk factors that we must be well aware of.

11.

The main economic reasons behind the evident downward trend in inflation

will continue to reduce the inflation in two ways: Firstly, the improvements in
economic fundamentals do not have influence on inflation immediately, but with a

certain time-lag. Consequently, it is expected that the downward trend in
inflation will continue. Second but more important factor is the fact that the
current economic policies that caused inflation to decline will be implemented
with determination in the future. Combined together, we believe that these two
favorable factors will bring the inflation down even further, despite the
impending above-mentioned risks.
III. CENTRAL BANK INTEREST RATES
12.

In light of the above-mentioned evaluations, we have decided to reduce

the short-term interest rates applicable in the Interbank Money Market and in
the Istanbul Stock Exchange Repurchase–Reverse Repurchase Market effective
from 8 April 2002 as following:
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Our borrowing rate has been decreased from
54 percent to 51 percent, and our lending rate has been decreased from
61 percent to 58 percent.
b) Weekly Interest Rates: Our borrowing rate for one week has been
decreased from 55 percent to 52 percent.

