Number:2002/26
29 March 2002
CENTRAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY
PRESS RELEASE
Regulations on required reserves, liquidity requirement and required
reserves for special finance houses are revised in regard to our monetary policy
by taking into consideration the international practices and based on the
amendments in the Central Bank Law No: 1211 brought by Law No:4651, they are
rearranged as explained below. The Communiqués on required reserves and
liquidity requirement issued in the Official Gazette today shall be effective on
date of issue starting from the tables dated 10.5.2002.
I-Objective
1. The main objective of the new regulation is to contribute to the
deepening and effectiveness of the interbank TL and FX markets and to the
sound progress of the financial sector towards the level of developed economies,
without making a concession over the price stability target and weakening the
control power of the Central Bank over monetary aggregates. Within this
framework, it is targeted to reduce the intermediary costs of financial
institutions and to provide more flexibility to enhance their liquidity
management. Furthermore, the new regulation provides for a more uniform and
simplified approach to required reserves and liquidity requirement.
2. By starting to pay interest for FX required reserves, all of the
required reserves shall be remunerated and the funding costs of the financial
institutions shall be reduced in this way. In determining the remuneration rates
for TL and FX required reserves, the developments in the domestic and

international markets regarding interest rates will be taken into consideration.
However, since the required reserves are considered as riskless assets for
banks, the remuneration rates shall be kept lower than the market interest
rates.
3. Favorable reserve requirement rate for TL liabilities compared to that
on FX liabilities shall continue to be implemented.
4. Under the previous regulation, the liquid assets to be maintained for TL
deposits and TL and FX other liabilities in the form of free deposits were
calculated as weekly averages. Whereas, in the new regulation the coverage on
which averaging will be based, is extended. Also, the required reserve
maintenance period, which was one week, is increased to two weeks.
5. Extending the coverage on which averaging will be based to include
reserve requirement as well as lengthening the maintenance period shall
contribute to the effectiveness of banks’ liquidity management. In this way, the
likelihood of pressure on interest rates, due to the increase in emission resulting
from salary payments and due to short term TL liquidity fluctuations resulting
from tax payments or auction-redemption differences, should diminish. In the
same manner, since banks shall have more flexibility in their FX liquidity
management, they shall be able to meet their short-term FX needs from their
own FX reserves.
6. Within the framework of the program announced at the beginning of
2002, the Central Bank shall gradually terminate its intermediary function in TL
and FX markets. In the meantime, lengthening the maintenance period for
reserve requirements and increase in average amount of reserve requirement
shall have great importance in creating depth in TL and FX interbank markets.
These regulations related to reserve requirements are a part of the regulatory
framework formed by the regulations on liquidity management announced by the

Central Bank at the beginning of 2002 in order to contribute to the soundness
of short term interest rates.
II- Details of the Communiqué on Reserve Requirements
7. As in current liquidity requirement practice, the TL and FX liabilities of
banks and special finance houses subject to reserve requirement shall be
determined by using the amounts to be reached after the deduction of items
from the total domestic liabilities that are calculated according to accounting
standards and recording procedures of these institutions, and also the deposits
and the current and share accounts collected in Turkey on behalf of their
branches abroad.
8. The cash portion of reserve requirement, liquidity requirement and
reserve requirement for special finance houses, which is 6 percent for TL
liabilities and 11% for FX liabilities, shall be kept as it was.
9. Considering the fact that special finance houses are subject to the
Banking Law No: 4389 and related provisions of Central Bank Law, the reserve
requirements for special finance houses and reserve requirement for banks are
unified in order to bring uniformity in practices and to apply similar and identical
requirements for the same liabilities. Thus, the current and share accounts of
special finance houses as well as their other liabilities are subject to reserve
requirements. However, since under the previous treatment funds that have
been borrowed by special finance houses were exempt from legal requirements,
these funds obtained before the issue date of this Communiqué shall be exempt
from reserve requirement until their maturity.
10. Considering the shortness of the maturity structure of banks’
liabilities, the period for calculation, maintenance and reporting for required
reserves has been determined to be two weeks each in order to provide the
required time for reporting.

11. In order to facilitate banks’ liquidity management and to contribute to
the stability of short term interest rates and exchange rates in this way, the
coverage of reserves maintained as weekly averages according to the previous
liquidity requirement is now extended, and 3 percentage points of reserve
requirement rates for TL and FX are also permitted to be maintained as two week averages.
12. Those banks (development and investment banks) that were not
subject to liquidity requirements as most of their liabilities stemmed from
public duties are now required to build reserves in order to prevent unfair
competition. However, their liabilities stemming from public duties shall be
shown under “items to be deducted from liabilities” and excluded from reserve
requirement. Although not included under “items deductible from liabilities”, the
funds obtained before the issuance of the new Communiqué by issuing bonds or
by using loans and that were not subject to legal requirements shall be exempt
from reserve requirement until their maturity.
13. In addition to the interest paid on TL required reserves maintained
for TL deposits since August 8, 2001 according to the previous Communiqué, the
required reserves for non-deposit TL liabilities and FX liabilities shall be
remunerated beginning from 24.5.2002.
14. In cases where reserve requirements are not fulfilled completely and
on time, for the missing portion of FX reserves that should be maintained,
penalty interest rate applicable to TL liabilities will be used.
III- The Details of Communiqué on Liquidity Requirement
15. The vault cash in TL and foreign exchange has been excluded from the
liquid assets. The liquidity ratio has been determined as 4 percent for TL
liabilities and 1 percent for FX liabilities, same as before. Government securities

owned by the banks and maintained in their accounts with the Central Bank of
Turkey shall be accepted as liquid assets.
16. In determining liabilities subject to liquidity requirement, liabilities
for required reserves shall be used.
17. The one-month period for calculating liabilities and maintaining liquid
assets is reduced to two weeks.
18. Due to the fact that a significant portion of the liabilities stem from
public duties, the banks (development and investment banks), which were not
previously covered by Liquidity Requirement No: 96/1, shall be taken into the
coverage of required reserve regulation to avoid unfair competition. However,
their liabilities stemming from public duties, shall be shown under “items
deductible from liabilities” and excluded from liquidity requirement. Although
not included under “items deductible from liabilities,” the funds obtained before
the issuance of the new Communiqué by issuing bonds or by using loans and that
were not subject to legal requirements shall be exempt from liquidity
requirement until their maturity.

Comparison Table

