No: 2002/37  
30th April 2002  
 
PRESS RELEASE  
 
1.  As has been stated in our earlier press releases, the main policy 
instrument of the Central Bank in the fight against inflation is the short -term 
interest rates. The Central Bank uses the short -term interest rates with the 
aim of reducing inflation only.  
2.  Despite our repeated announcements on the same issue, the Central 
Bank’s current policy has been, for some time, made subject to criticisms, 
stating tha t interest rates should also be adjusted by taking other objectives 
into account. However, the Central Bank’s only concern is the inflation and will 
continue to be so by its law. In other words, growth, foreign trade balance, 
short positions of banking sys tem and private sector, real interest rates or 
exchange rates are not the basic variables we have in mind in designing our 
interest rate policy. It is no doubt that the changes in interest rate based on 
our inflation forecasts will have influence on such v ariables.  
3.  Rehabilitation of financial system is one of the basic goals of the 
current program. Significant achievements have been made so far in this area. 
As a matter of fact, an economy whose financial system gets increasingly 
stronger becomes less s usceptible to excessive volatility in exchange rate, as in 
the case of other economic variables. In the light of this consideration and the 
past experiences, the Central Bank draws attention to the risks arising from the 
short or long foreign exchange posi tion, besides other risks. The warnings made by the Central Bank on the exchange rate risk should not be misinterpreted as if 
it worried about the current level of the exchange rates.  
4. In fact, in 2001 and 2002 the Central Bank has monitored the foreign 
exchange market carefully, and has taken all the necessary measures rapidly in 
the context of its duties and responsibilities by law in order to ensure that the 
floating rate regime may function properly. The Central Bank will continue to 
keep an eye on th e foreign exchange market in the coming period too. To this 
end, a “Foreign Exchange, Foreign Banknotes and Forward Transactions 
Surveillance System” has been set up. Starting from 1 May 2002, this system 
will closely observe daily foreign exchange and for eign banknotes buying -selling 
transactions against Turkish Lira made by banks and special finance houses 
operating in Turkey. Moreover , the Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency is 
exercising controls over short foreign exchange positions and is taking  measures 
for the risk exposures . 
5.  In addition, it has been asserted that high real interest rates could 
lead to short foreign exchange position and that the Central Bank should cut its 
interest rates accordingly. Real interest rates are the outcome of the risks 
arising from past crises, long and volatile inflation. Real interest rates will fall 
down permanently, only if structural reforms are made unreservedly, fiscal 
discipline is maintained, the inflation is brought under control, and sustainability 
of Treasury borrowing is ensured.  
6.  Adjusting interest rates for considerations other than price stability, 
which is openly declared by law, might give mixed signals to economic agents 
about the targets of the Central Bank. Such a wrong policy action migh t increase 
the risk premium, and the real interest rates accordingly. The Central Bank and the current program should not even try to indulge in the luxury of making such 
mistake. This point must be understood very well by all.  
7.  Furthermore, the Central  Bank’s optimistic outlook for the future 
inflation is going on. Persistence in structural reforms,  and developments in the 
basic variables affecting inflation are the main reasons for the ongoing 
optimism.  
8.  Among these basic variables, input costs are performing favorably 
well. According to monthly averages in the period between November 2001 and 
March 2002, the depreciation of the US dollar and the Euro against the Turkish 
Lira amounted to 15,2 percent, and 18,2 percent respectively. Public sector 
prices, which have important influence on the input costs, rose by 8,4 percent 
only. Moreover, although we do not have the latest figures at hand, the hourly 
wages in manufacturing industry rose by 6,5 percent only in the last quarter of 
2001, which remained b elow the inflation of that period. It is estimated that 
wages have little increased in the first quarter of 2002. In light of these 
figures, it is thought that input costs are not exerting much inflationary 
pressure, and in particular, the delayed effects of decreasing exchange rates 
will positively affect the future course of inflation.  
9.  The outlook for inflation expectations is improving. According to the 
Central Bank Inflation Survey conducted in the second half of April 2002, the 
inflation expectatio n for the year -end consumer prices slumped to 37,0 percent, 
from 43,6 percent in the second half of March 2002. The expectation for the 
next 12 months declined to 35,0 percent from 39,6 percent. According to the 
Central Bank Business Tendency Survey conduc ted in March 2002, the inflation 
expectation for the year -end wholesale prices fell to 52;8 percent, from 56,3 percent in February. The expectation for the next 12 months declined to 50,0 
percent, from 54,3 percent.  
10.  We have recently been receiving pos itive signals about demand and 
supply figures. Industry output index and capacity utilization ratio are keeping 
their upward trend. Capacity utilization ratios in the private sector 
manufacturing industry have realized at 71,3 percent in March 2002, surpas sing 
the 70 percent threshold for the first time since the November 2000 crisis. 
Moreover, the revenues on VAT, which is excised on imports, are on the rise as 
of March 2002. These are indicating a revival in the production. In line with 
these positive sig ns on the output front, the messages from several firms are 
indicating signs of recovery in demand. However, we think that an increase in 
demand will not cause an inflationary pressure for the time being.  
11.  At this point, we deem it useful to repeat the  warning we have made 
in our earlier announcements. It should be borne in mind that fighting inflation 
without causing an output loss can be achieved only if the price and incomes 
policies are pursued by public and private sectors in harmony with the targe ted 
inflation, besides the continuation of structural reforms . In this context, it is 
important that the private sector should not take advantage from a possible rise 
in demand as an opportunity to raise their profit margins, by short -term 
considerations. Their wage and price policies should be determined within the 
framework of the inflation target. Besides developments in basic variables 
determining inflation and inflation expectations, the Central Bank will be 
considering also the price -setting behaviors  of the public and private sectors 
for determining the future course of interest rates.  
12.  In light of the above analyses, we have decided to reduce the short -
term interest rates applicable in the Interbank Money Market and in the Istanbul Stock Exchange  Repurchase -Reverse Repurchase Market effective 
from 30 April 2002 as follows:  
a) Overnight Interest Rates: our borrowing rate has been decreased 
from 51 percent to 48 percent, and our lending rate has been 
decreased from 58 percent to 55 percent.  
b) Weekly Inte rest Rates: Our borrowing rate for one week has been 
decreased from 52 percent to 49 percent.  