No: 2002-39
May 8, 2002
PRESS RELEASE
APRIL INFLATION AND FORWARD-LOOKING EXPECTATIONS

I.

GENERAL EVALUATION

1.
The downward inflationary trend has continued also in April, which
typically exhibits seasonal price increases. Consumer Price Index (CPI) and
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) increased by 2,1 percent and 1,8 percent,
respectively. Annual inflation figures declined to 52,7 percent in CPI and 58,0
percent in WPI (Table 1).
2.
In addition to the favorable developments in exchange rates, domestic
demand and public prices which led to a decline in inflation in recent months, the
rate of increase in food and agriculture prices that remained quite below the
April averages, have kept the April inflation in accordance with market
inflationary expectations. However, the high rate of increase in clothing and
footwear prices due to seasonal effects, have caused CPI (excluding food) to
increase by 2,5 percent, while WPI (excluding agriculture) increased by 2,1
percent.
3.
The annual inflation trend- calculated by the de-seasonalized consumer
and wholesale price indices according to quarterly moving averages- has
continued its downward trend also in April. As of April, annual inflation trend has
fallen to 29,5 percent in WPI, and 23,7 percent in CPI. The annual inflation
trend is 18,6 percent in WPI (excluding agriculture) and 36,1 in CPI (excluding
food).
Table 1: CPI, WPI and Sub-items
Yearly %
Monthly % Change
Change
2001 2002
2002
2002
2002
April April February March
April

CPI
Goods
Services
Excluding Food
WPI
Public
Private
Private
Manufacturing
Excluding
Agriculture
Excluding Agr.
And Energy

48,3
49,4
46,1
51,8
50,9
58,3
48,2

52,7
59,3
40,9
48,4
58,0
52,7
60,1

1,8
1,5
2,3
1,3
2,6
0,5
3,3

1,2
0,7
2,2
1,8
1,9
2,0
1,8

2,1
2,4
1,3
2,5
1,8
2,4
1,6

55,8

55,6

0,7

1,3

1,9

56,7

54,6

0,6

1,6

2,1

55,5

54,2

0,7

1,7

2,1

Source: CBRT, SIS.

Developments in Consumer Prices
4.
In recent months, the elimination of input cost pressure on prices and
continued sluggish domestic demand have put the inflation in a downward trend.
Since the food prices have slowed down considerably since February, the decline
in inflation has become more evident in March and April. April CPI increase was
mainly due to the clothing and footwear prices, which showed a 13 percent
increase mainly because of seasonal effects. The contribution of clothing and
footwear item to the 2,1 percent increase in CPI stood at 1,2 percentage points.
5.
Food, beverages and tobacco prices increased by only 0,6 percent
following the decline in March. Fresh fruit and vegetable prices that showed
high rates of increases during the last quarter of 2001 and January 2002, have
declined in recent months as consumers switched to substituting goods, and
favorable weather conditions affected supply positively. This situation has
contributed to the slowdown of inflation both in the food items and in the CPI in
general.
Figure 1: CPI and CPI Excluding Food
Yearly % Change

Monthly % Change

Source: CBRT, SIS.
6. Price increase in goods registered a remarkable slowdown in contrast to the
services sector, which preserved the price rigidity. In the services sector,
prices fell down to 1,3 percent in April. The reasons for this decline can be
accounted for the diminishing rate of increase in monthly housing rents, which
decreased to 1,5 percent in April, and the slowdown in the rate of increase in
the sub-items of the services, excluding culture-entertainment. In the goods
sector, on the other hand, the rate of change in prices in food and clothing,
which reached to 2,4 percent owing to the seasonal factors, was the driving
force. Excluding food and clothing categories, rate of increase in prices of
services falls down to 1,1 percent per month.
Figure 2: Goods and Services Prices
Yearly % Change

Monthly % Change

Source: CBRT, SIS.

Developments in Wholesale Prices
7.
In April, while the slowdown in the rate of increase in agricultural prices
continued, the private manufacturing industry and public sector price increases
remained above previous months’ levels. Rising crude oil prices affected the rate

of price change in mining, petroleum products and chemical sector sub-items
adversely. Due to these developments, rate of increase in public sector and
private manufacturing industry price indices, both of which are above the
expected rate of change, were 2,4 and 1,9 percent per month, respectively.
Within the private manufacturing industry, rate of price increase has continued
to vary across different sub-categories. In clothing and leather products
sectors, which are generally export-oriented sectors, we see an acceleration of
an upward trend in prices with the coming of the new season. Price increases in
the other non-metallic mineral products category containing key inputs for the
construction industry, and in the wood and cork products continued also in April.
The higher than expected price increase in manufacturing industry was balanced
by that of in the agriculture sector, which remained below the April averages.
As a result, the monthly rate of increase in WPI was realized at 1,8 percent.
Figure 3: WPI and WPI Excluding Agriculture
Yearly % Change

Monthly % Change

Source: CBRT, SIS.
II.

FORWARD-LOOKING EXPECTATIONS

8.
In April, due to seasonal factors, which can be clearly observed from
previous inflationary developments, the monthly inflation rate stood above the
March inflation rate and generally in line with inflationary expectations. The
survey results compiled after the announcement of March inflation figures
showed that inflationary expectations were gradually approaching to the endyear target (Graph 4). The April inflation figures, which are in line with the
expectations, will strengthen the expectations about reaching the year-end CPI
inflation target.

9.
As a result of the strict implementation of monetary and fiscal policies,
the downward trend in inflation has become evident. This has increased the
credibility of the economic program and the belief in the end-year inflation
target. In the following period, strict implementation of the economic program,
together with the incomes policy and the price-setting policy of public and
private sectors, conducted in line with the inflation target, will contribute to the
elimination of inflationary inertia and will reinforce the economic recovery.
Figure 4: Year-end Inflation Expectations According to the CBRT Survey of
Expectations

Source: CBRT.

10.
In the next period, we expect that inflation will be affected favorably by
the downward trend in the agriculture and food price increases, the lagged
effect of exchange rate developments on production costs, and the absence of
demand-push pressure. However, crude oil prices, the divergent pricing behavior
within the private manufacturing industry sub-sectors and the probable impact
of exchange rate changes on the public sector prices are regarded as risk
factors.

