No:2002 -45 
May 31, 2002  
 
THE CENTRAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY  
PRESS RELEASE  
 
A) FOREIGN EXCHANGE BUYING AUCTION PROGRAM FOR JUNE 2002  
 
As known, considering the fact that having stronger reserve position in the 
medium to long term would boost the market’s confidence in the existing program, in 
order to increase the level of foreign exchange reserves the Central Bank of the 
Republic of Turkey (CBRT) continued to hold foreign exchange buying auctions in May 
2002, which started on April 1, 2002. T he aim of these foreign exchange buying auctions 
is to enhance the foreign exchange reserve position of the CBRT at the market rates 
without targetting any specific exchange rate level, if and when excess foreign exchange 
supply situation develops dependin g upon the balance of payments, without creating an 
additional volatility in the foreign exchange rates and without disturbing the foreign 
exchange positions of the banks. b  
 
In this respect, during June 2002, the CBRT will continue to hold daily foreign 
exchange buying auctions in the amount of USD 20 million. There will be 20 foreign 
exchange buying auctions in June 2002, therefore the maximum amount of foreign 
exchange to be bought via these auctions will be USD 400 million.  
 
The implementation started in May 2002, which allows the CBRT to compensate 
the cumulative foreign exchange amount that could not be bought as a result of either 
no bidding or insufficient bidding (less than USD 20 million) in an auction will be 
continued in June 2002. In this respe ct, the compensation amount that will be added to 
daily USD 20 million amount, will be limited to USD 20 million. Therefore, the maximum 
amount to be bought in the auctions will be USD 40 million. Meanwhile, the foreign 
exchange amount that could not be bo ught in May 2002 auctions will not be 
compensated in June 2002 auctions.    
 
B) TURKISH LIRA DEPOSIT BUYING AUCTION PROGRAM FOR JUNE 2002  
 
The CBRT has decided to continue Turkish Lira Deposit Buying Auctions with 
four week standard maturity during June 20 02, which was started in April 2002 in the 
Interbank Money Market as a supplement to the existing instruments to enhance the 
effectiveness to sterilize the additional Turkish Lira liquidity in the system.  
 
In this respect, considering that foreign exchang e buying auctions will be held in 
June and the level of the Turkish Lira liquidity, the maximum amount to be auctioned in 
each week is increased from from TL 250 trillion to TL 350 trillion. However, different 
from the implementations of auctions which wer e held in April and May, while other 
conditions remaining the same, during June 2002 Turkish Lira deposit auctions will be 
held on Wednesdays and Fridays and the maximum amount in each auction will be TL 
175 trillion.  