No: 2002-91

December 2, 2002

PRESS RELFASE

As is known, the Central Bank has announced through several press releases that, under

the floating exchange rate regime the level of exchange rate is determined by supply and
demand conditions in the markets, but still the volatility in the exchange rate has been closely
observed, and that the Central Bank may directly intervene in the markets, in the event of an
excessive volatılity that might occur in both directions.

In this regard, the last direct intervention of the Central Bank in the foreign exchange
market was on July 11, 2002 wıth the aim of keeping the excessive volatility in the exchange
rate under control.

There has recently been an extreme volatility in exchange rates due to the effect of
positive expectations in financial markets, the efforts to meet the liguidity needs arisen before
the religious holiday, the addıtional TL liguidity demand created by successful Treasury
borrowing auction, and the weak demand in the foreign exchange market. Therefore, the
Central Bank has directly intervened in the foreign exchange market in order to prevent the
volatility observed in the exchange rate. Here, it must be underlined that, today's intervention
has been made as a result of the excessive volatility in the exchange rates only, and that it
should not be interpreted as 1f the Central bank were uneasy at the actual level of the exchange
rates.

On the other hand, as stated in the press release dated November 29, 2002, various
comments are appearing in the press claiming that the foreign exchange buying auctions would
resume any time. However, as already mentioned in the said press release, the Central Bank
may resume the foreign exchange buying auctions in case there 1is an excess supply of foreign
exchange resulting from the reverse currency substitution process, and the strong balance of
payments. Moreover, as announced to the public previousİy, the month of December is a
period when there is no excess supply of foreign exchange resulting from the balance of
payments because of seasonal reasons. Notwithstandıng, the Central Bank and Turkish bankıing
system are continuousİy monitoring and evaluating the developments in the reverse cürrency
substitution process, and the Central Bank may start to hold programmed foreign exchange
buying auctions in the next future.

Finally, it should be noted that, the Central Bank issues warnings with regard to foreign
exchange positions from time to time. İt is obvious that the risk exposures arising from the
foreign exchange positions are higher under the floating exchange rate regime. For this reason,
financial institutions, such as banks and other decision-making units in the economy should be
extremely cautious in taking exchange rate risk.

Wiıthin this framework, 1it is no doubt that the Central Bank wıll continue to underline
the danger of the risks arising from short or long foreign exchange positions in the light of the
past experiences. Managing the exchange rate risk efficiently in the financial system, and
making of the mechanisms that will ensure the monitoring of the effective risk management
are of utmost importance under the inflation-targeting regime that the Central Bank i1s
currently working on the preparations to implement it. Within this perspective, the Central
Bank has long been performing a profound evaluation of the foreign exchange markets, and will
continue to do so in the period ahead.
