Number: 2003 -32  
16 July 2003 
 
THE CBRT PRESS RELEASE 
 
A) THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE BUYING AUCTIONS 
Considering that strong reserve position would boos t the market’s confidence in the current 
program and observing the excess foreign exchange s upply, the Central Bank of Turkey has initiated to 
hold foreign exchange buying auctions as of 6 May 2 003.  
Since it was predicted that the excess foreign exch ange supply would increasingly continue in 
July as well due to the seasonal factors, the daily  auction amount was increased to USD 40 million in 
early-July. In July, the CBRT bought USD 440 millio n through foreign exchange buying auctions, held 
on 11 working days by 16 July 2003.  
However, it is observed that the increase in the ex cess foreign exchange supply is realizing 
beyond the expectations in July owing to the season al factors. Hence, the daily average amount of bids  
for foreign exchange buying auctions in July showed  an increase compared to June.  
In this context, it was decided to increase the dai ly amount of auctions to USD 50 million 
starting from 17 July 2003 provided that all other auction conditions will remain the same. This decis ion 
was made during the communication process that has been continuing uninterruptedly with the 
participants. 
 
As usual, the CBRT will continue to closely monitor  the volatility in exchange rates and will directly  
intervene in the market in case of an excessive vol atility in both directions. Moreover, as were 
announced by our previous press releases, the CBRT may, with a prior notice, suspend the auctions 
before the end of the period in the cases where the  depth of foreign exchange market is lost; and 
excessive volatility is observed in exchange rates due to an external shock or unpredictable 
developments. 
 
B) THE TURKISH LIRA DEPOSIT BUYING AUCTION PROGRAM FOR JULY 
   With the initiation of foreign exchange buying a uctions as of April 2002 due to the reverse 
currency substitution and considering the excess li quidity of TL 6.5 quadrillion sterilized by the CBR T 
at that time, the CBRT has started to conduct weekl y Turkish Lira deposit buying auctions amounting to  
a maximum of TL 100 trillion with a standard four-w eek maturity with the aim of enhancing the 
effectiveness of its efforts to sterilize the exces s Turkish Lira liquidity in the system and generati ng a 
reference interest rate of indicator nature for a f our-week period for the markets.  
The maximum amount to be bought in Turkish Lira dep osit buying auctions with a standard 
four-week maturity, which have been held every week  on Wednesday and Friday in July, was TL 200 
trillion. The total amount, which was sterilized th rough the auctions, realized as TL 1.5 quadrillion by 16 
July 2003.  
Despite the Turkish lira liquidity that was pumped into the markets through foreign exchange 
buying auctions started on 6 May 2003 and direct fo reign exchange buying interventions of May and 
June, a decline was observed in the sterilized exce ss Turkish lira liquidity. In this framework, it wa s 
decided to cut down the maximum amount of the four- week Turkish lira deposit buying auctions to TL 
100 trillion starting from 18 July 2003.   
. 
 