Number: 2003 - 38 
29 August 2003 
 
THE CBRT PRESS RELEASE 
 
A) FOREIGN EXCHANGE BUYING AUCTION PROGRAM FOR SEPT EMBER 
Considering that strong reserve position would boos t the market’s confidence in the 
current program and observing the excess foreign ex change supply, the Central Bank of 
Turkey (CBRT) started to hold foreign exchange buyi ng auctions, on 6 May 2003.  
Daily auctions that had been announced as USD 20 mi llion in May were increased to 
USD 30 million in June, to USD 40 million at the st art of July, and to USD 50 million on 17 
July 2003, with the prospects of the progressively increasing trend in excess foreign exchange 
supply due to the seasonal factors. Through foreign  exchange buying auctions, the CBRT 
bought USD 3.010 billion in total in the period bet ween 6 May and 29 August 2003. 
Moreover, USD 2.083 billion in total was bought by means of four outright buying 
interventions aiming at preventing excessive volati lity in exchange rates. Hence, total amount 
of USD 5.093 billion was bought through foreign exc hange buying auctions and foreign 
exchange outright buying interventions in the May –  August period.  
Although it is predicted that the excess foreign ex change supply observed in the May-
August period should continue also in September, it  has been decided to determine the total 
amount of daily foreign exchange buying through the  auctions with a more flexible method, 
considering the volatility in excess supply that mi ght occur due to seasonal factors. This 
decision has been taken upon uninterrupted communic ation with market players. Accordingly, 
the total amount of daily foreign exchange buying w ill be USD 40 million, and a selling 
option based on the average price realized in the a uction will be granted exclusively to those 
institutions (banks and special finance houses) tha t are eligible to sell foreign exchange in that 
auction. The maximum amount of the optional selling  that an institution can utilize will be 
limited to 50 percent of what it has sold in that a uction. Therefore, the maximum daily auction 
can amount to USD 60 million, by the utilization of  the optional selling of USD 20 million. 
On the other hand, in the event that there is no bi d, or no optional selling, there will be no 
foreign exchange buying in the subsequent auctions in order to compensate the unsold 
amounts. Accordingly, foreign exchange buying aucti ons are to be held on 21 working days 
throughout the September, except for September 1 st , 2003, which is public holiday in USA, 
and it is planned that the maximum amount to be bou ght should be USD 1.260 billion. 
Those institutions wishing to utilize the optional foreign exchange selling after the 
auction is completed, have to declare the amounts t hat they wish to utilize to phone numbers 
(312) 309 19 66-89 at Foreign Exchange and Banknote s Markets Division before 03:30 p.m. 
The total amount of optional selling by institution s after the auction will be announced on the 
Reuters CBTQ page.  
As were announced by previous press releases, the C BRT may, with a prior notice, 
suspend the auctions before the end of the period i n the cases where the depth of foreign 
exchange market is lost and excessive volatility is  observed in exchange rates due to an 
external shock or unpredictable developments. In ad dition, the CBRT may make changes in the amounts of daily auctions by announcing it in a dvance, due to unexpected significant and 
enduring changes in the excess foreign exchange sup ply.  
As usual, the CBRT will continue to closely monitor  the volatility in exchange rates 
and will directly intervene in the market in case o f an excessive volatility in both directions. 
 
B) THE TL DEPOSIT BUYING AUCTION PROGRAM FOR SEPTEM BER 
 The CBRT will continue to conduct Turkish Lira buy ing auctions in September 2003 
with a standard four-week maturity that was initiat ed in April 2002 as a supplement to its 
existing instruments in the Interbank Money Market with the aim of enhancing the 
effectiveness of its efforts to sterilize the exces s Turkish lira liquidity in the system.  
Turkish lira buying auctions will be held every wee k on Wednesday and Friday as 
before, and the maximum amount to be bought in ever y auction will be TL 100 trillion. 
 