No: 2003-5 
January 20, 2003 
 
PRESS RELEASE 
ON THE ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE VOLUMES 
OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE TRANSACTIONS AGAINST TURKISH LI RA 
MADE BY BANKS AND SPECIAL FINANCE INSTITUTIONS   
 
Monitoring of the financial markets is among the Ce ntral Bank’s main duties by Law. 
Under the framework of its Law, the Central Bank cl osely observes the foreign exchange 
market, as well as the other financial markets. Mon itoring of the foreign exchange market is 
considered crucial for taking the necessary regulat ory measures to ensure that the market 
could operate efficiently in full agreement with th e principles of the floating exchange-rate 
regime. In this regard, a monitoring system was ini tiated by the Central Bank in 2002 to better 
oversee the volumes and types of transactions in th e foreign exchange market and it was 
announced by the Press Release dated January 2, 200 2 that the information on the depth of the 
foreign exchange markets would be regularly announc ed to the public, once the monitoring 
system starts providing reliable results. 
 In this context, starting today, the data on the v olumes of foreign exchange, banknotes 
and forward foreign exchange buying and selling tra nsactions performed by the banks, which 
are established in Turkey, or are operating in Turk ey through branch offices, and the special 
finance institutions will be published regularly on  the Central Bank Website 
(www.tcmb.gov.tr ) under the heading of “CBRT Data/Financial Markets ” . 
Transaction volumes are on a daily basis and will b e published after five working days 
following the transaction date. In addition, transa ction volumes for the period of October 1, 
2002 - January 10, 2003 have also been published. T he transaction volumes are recorded in 
US dollars, and grouped as foreign exchange and ban knotes. The data on the foreign 
exchange transactions are classified under three he adings, as domestic interbank, domestic 
customers and customers abroad. A distinction betwe en spot and forward foreign exchange 
transactions is also made. Clarifications about the  contents of the data can be found in the 
table footnotes.  
 
 