13 June 2003 
THE CBRT PRESS RELEASE 
 
The Central Bank of Turkey (CBRT) continues to hold  foreign exchange buying 
auctions in the month of June as well, again in lin e with the principles set forth in the 
press release of 5 May 2003. The said auctions were  made public with press releases 
on the 5 th  and 29 th  of May 2003, in connection with the excess foreign  exchange 
supply resulting from the reverse currency substitu tion process, also upon having 
considered that a strong foreign exchange reserve p osition by the CBRT would help 
boost market confidence in the current program. 
 
It is decided to discontinue the practice of “the m aximum bid price” as of 16 June 
2003, all other rules of the foreign exchange buyin g auctions being the same. The 
rationale behind this decision, which was taken acc ording to the uninterrupted 
communication process with the market participants,  is explained below, in line with 
‘the principle of transparency’ in monetary and exc hange rate policy implementations.  
 
As it is known, ‘the maximum bid price’ used to be calculated on the basis of ‘the 
average value of the averages of the buying and sel ling rates as quoted by banks in the 
interbank foreign exchange market for 1 USD’, in ac cordance with ‘The Rules for 
Determining the Indicative Exchange Rates’ that wer e announced by our press release 
no. 2002-25, dated 28 March 2002. Since the maximum  price obtained as such 
happened to be somewhat lower than the market price  from time to time, it was 
observed that the bid amounts were rather low espec ially in June, despite the foreign 
exchange supply. In fact, the total amount of bids for 7 auctions out of 10 auctions 
held in June remained below the announced maximum a mount. The maximum bid 
price fixed in all those 7 auctions remained below the best foreign exchange selling 
prices of banks that offered price quotations in th e bidding period of auction, and 
therefore the planned amount of foreign exchange bu ying could not be achieved in 
some days. With this amendment, it is aimed to buy the planned daily amount of 
foreign exchange.  
 
Moreover, as announced in our press release of 5 Ma y 2003, the CBRT may, 
with a prior notice, suspend the auctions before th e end of the period in the cases 
where the depth of foreign exchange market is lost due to an external shock or 
unpredictable developments and excessive volatility  is observed.  
 
 
 