No:2003-31 
July 16, 2003 
PRESS RELEASE ON THE CBRT INTEREST RATE CUTS  
  
 I.  GENERAL EVALUATION  
 1.   In “Outlook” section of our press release entitle d June and Inflation and Outlook” 
dated July 4,2003, it was emphasized that: 
(i) downward trend in inflation became more evident  with the figures pertaining 
to June inflation, 
(ii) developments observed in exchange rates in the  last few months and favorable 
developments in inflation expectations coupled with  the prospective tendency 
of these variables in the near future encourages CB RT to think positive about 
the future inflation trend, 
(iii) the announcements made by officials were deem ed favorable in terms of 
conformity with the inflation target, however cost of increase in wages and 
salaries exceeding budget targets would create adve rse effects on inflation as 
these increases will be met by increasing taxes ins tead of cuts in other 
expenditure items,  
(iv) taking into account the above-mentioned points  and departing from the 
supposition that the program would be implemented w ithout any interruptions, 
the most important development that could pose thre at to the future trend of 
inflation could be the signals about increasing dom estic demand, however 
actual production, which was still below the potent ial production level, would 
palliate the unfavorable pressure to be exerted by domestic demand on 
inflation,  
(v)  the negative effect that might arise from demand pr essure could be 
compensated sufficiently by the recent developments  in exchange rates, the 
favorable inflation expectations and the strong lik elihood of sustenance of 
these trends, 
(vi)  these favorable developments should not be perceive d as a short-sighted 
opportunity to increase profit margins by the priva te sector; long-term interest 
should be considered and actions should be taken re sponsibly,    (vii)  the downward inflation trend achieved could only be  stopped by deviations 
from the program and it was of utmost importance th at fiscal  discipline was  
maintained and structural reforms were carried on t imely and uninterruptedly. 
 In light of these points, welcoming the above-ment ioned developments, the CBRT 
warned that any kind of relaxation would be a big e conomic mistake and departing from the 
supposition that no concessions would be allowed in  fiscal discipline and structural reform 
process, the CBRT envisioned that the favorable dev elopments observed in inflation since 
April would continue and the end-year inflation tar get of 20 percent would be attained.   
 2.  The developments observed since early-July have st rengthened the probability that 
the fundamental factors determining the inflation w ill pursue a favorable course in the 
following period as well. These developments reinfo rced the CBRT’s hopeful vision for the 
future trend of inflation too. The structural refor m process and measures on budget discipline 
are the leading ones among these developments. Sign ificant progress was made in concluding 
the Fifth Review conducted with the IMF and in effe cting the reforms that are essential for the 
implementation of the program successfully. Moreove r, it is acknowledged that the budget 
discipline will mainly be maintained through expens e-restrictive measures. This development 
is considered to be encouraging with respect to the  inflation of the following period. 
 3. Meanwhile, these favorable developments reflect ed on the market expectations for 
inflation as well. The results of expectation surve y for the first half of July point at a 
noteworthy decline in inflation expectations. Vario us econometric models, which are used by 
the Central Bank in forecasting inflation for the f ollowing period on the assumption that 
current fiscal and structural policies will be main tained, produce hopeful results that are 
consistent with year-end inflation target. These re sults are consistent with the improvement in 
the market expectations too. 
II. THE CENTRAL BANK INTEREST RATES 
4.  In the light of the evaluations above, starting  from 16 July 2003, CBRT has decided 
to cut short-term interest rates applied at CBRT In terbank Money Market and Repo-Reverse 
Repo Market at Istanbul Stock Exchange as follows: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing interest rate w as cut to 35 percent from 38 
percent and lending interest rate to 41 percent fro m 45 percent. 
b)  Other Maturity: One-week borrowing interest rate wa s cut to 35 percent from 38 
percent. c)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: In the framew ork of Late Liquidity 
Window application, CBRT overnight borrowing intere st rate applicable between 
16:00 – 16:30 Hours at Interbank Money Market was c ut to 46 percent from 50 
percent. Borrowing interest rate of 5 percent remai ned the same. 
 
Moreover, the interest rates on overnight and one-w eek maturity borrowing facilities provided 
for primary dealer banks via repo transactions with in the framework of open market 
transactions were cut to 37 percent from 41 percent .  
 