Number:2003-25 
June 4, 2003 
PRESS RELEASE 
ON THE CBRT INTEREST RATE CUTS  
 I.  GENERAL EVALUATION   
1.   The primary objective of the Central bank of Turk ey (CBRT) is to 
achieve price stability as stipulated in its Law. A ccordingly, the CBRT’s first 
priority is to hit the inflation target, determined  together with the Government. 
Short-term interest rates, which are the main polic y instrument of the CBRT, 
are adjusted by considering only and only to which extent the future trend of 
inflation is compatible with the inflation target. In other words, the CBRT’s 
decisions on the short-term interest rates are neve r destined to affect any 
variables other than inflation.  
2.    It is no doubt that, the inflation rate cannot b e considered separately 
from other variables in the economy. As has been an nounced several times by 
the CBRT, there are a series of variables influencin g inflation. The common 
conviction of various academicians who have studied  the inflationary process in 
Turkey is that the main variables shaping the cours e of inflation are i) the rate 
of increase in exchange rate, ii) the expectations ab out the future trend of 
inflation, iii) the prices in long-term contracts m ade in line with these 
expectations such as wage increases, and iv) the dem and pressure determined 
according to the direction and the size of discrepa ncy between the current 
output level and the potential output level. 
 
 3.    In this framework, the following points must now  be very clear:  
a)  The CBRT is carefully monitoring the factors having an effect on 
inflation by considering not only the current indic ators, but also 
the future probable trend of variables.  
b)  The current and future probable movements in the va riables 
affecting inflation are drawing the course of futur e inflation. And 
these considerations, in turn, are influencing the decisions of 
CBRT on short-term interest rates. 
c)  For example, the gradual appreciation of Turkish lir a suggests 
that the downward trend in inflation will be streng thened, 
provided that the other variables do not act agains t this trend. 
d)  It is obvious that bringing short-term interest rat es down by 
looking at such a trend has nothing to do with the current 
exchange rate level. The aim is only to come closer to an interest 
rate level in line with the inflation target in the  disinflation 
efforts, and to give a signal to the public that th e general course 
of economy is in good progress. 
e)  In addition, the relationship between short-term in terest rates 
and exchange rates is many-sided and complex. The fol lowing 
three examples can be considered to provide sufficie nt proof for 
the complexity of the situation. 
f)  Firstly, other variables being the same, the declin ing yields of 
financial instruments in TL may exert an upward pres sure on 
exchange rate by increasing the demand for foreign e xchange in 
the detriment of Turkish lira demand. This is what expected of those who establish a reverse correlation between i nterest rate 
and exchange rate.  
g)  Secondly, the CBRT’s short-term interest rates cut i n line with 
the price stability goal will enhance the confidenc e in the current 
program, and will reinforce the reverse currency su bstitution 
process even further, being a favorable signal both  for inflation 
and for general business climate. In this case, the  pressure on 
exchange rates will be relieved, in contrast to the above-
mentioned effect.  
h)  Thirdly, contrary to the first two effects based on  economic 
fundamentals, there may be some movements in exchang e rates 
unrelated to economic rationale. Although such deve lopments tend 
to be temporary, it is obvious that they can contin ue for a certain 
time and make the relationship between short-term i nterest 
rates and exchange rate even more complex. 
i)  In the economics, exchange rate is one of the areas that has 
mostly been made subject of academic discussions, a nd there is 
nearly a consensus that the theories developed ther eon are not at 
desired level yet. Moreover, if we consider the inf luences of 
expectations on debt sustainability over exchange rat e and 
interest rate, not found in standard text books, it becomes clear 
that the subject of exchange rate calls for the exper tise at an 
advanced level.  
j)  It must be kept in mind that in line with the incre ased confidence 
in the current program, the portfolio shifts from f oreign 
exchange to Turkish lira is a desired result. It is true that such a 
development or increase in the foreign direct inves tments in the longer term may result in excess foreign exchange sup ply, putting 
pressure on exchange rates. The solution lies not in  cutting short-
term interest rates with the aim of intervening in exchange rate 
only independently from future trend of inflation, but in 
sterilizing the excess foreign exchange supply by the  CBRT 
through transparent methods consistent with the flo ating 
exchange rate regime. In fact, the excess foreign exch ange 
supply resulting from reverse currency substitution  started in 
May 2003 is being sterilized through buying auctions. The CBRT 
will continue to pursue effectively its sterilizati on policy in the 
medium and long-term as well considering the develo pments in 
foreign exchange and Turkish lira liquidity, in comp liance with the 
public domestic debt management policies.  
k)  The exchange rate and interest rate relationship sho uld be 
evaluated in the light of the above-mentioned infor mation and the 
analyses thereof should be made more comprehensivel y and multi-
dimensional.  
4.    On the other hand, the main determinant of the v ariables affecting 
inflation and real interest rates is the current ec onomic policies. In this 
context, especially fiscal policy comes first due to  Turkey’s sui generis  
conditions. Undoubtedly, the reason is the still hi gh level of public sector debt, 
despite its downward trend under the current progra m.  
5.   As has been underlined many times in our previous  announcements, the 
fiscal discipline is the sine qua non  condition for reducing the ratio of public 
debt to the GNP permanently. Such a declining trend  will boost the public 
confidence in the debt sustainability and then both  the borrowing maturities will 
extend and the real interest rates will come down. 6.   As clearly understood by majority of the public, real interest rates 
cannot fall by reducing nominal interest rates arti ficially. Such a behavior would 
only disrupt the equilibrium established with great  efforts, and would not bring 
real interest rates down. Correct treatment can onl y be possible with a correct 
diagnosis. Accordingly, real interest rates can be reduced through achieving a 
permanent fiscal discipline and reducing inflation.  In fact, when the program 
implementation is examined since the beginning it c an be easily seen that all 
increases in real interest rates have resulted from  the likelihood of a deviation 
from the current program, or just a perception ther eof, except for exogenous 
shocks.   
7.    The current program is an indivisible integrity.  The main goals of the 
program are to achieve price stability, which is th e pre-condition of the 
sustainable growth, and to reduce the ratio of publ ic debt stock to GNP, and the 
main pillars are the monetary discipline and struct ural reforms. Failure in any of 
these pillars or the likelihood of failure would ca use the disruption of the whole 
program. Therefore, what must be done is to remove convincingly the failure or 
the failure possibility, instead of looking for sol utions in the areas that are 
unrelated to the source of the problem.  
II. EVALUATION ON THE INFLATIONARY TREND 
8.  Especially since April, cost-push pressures have st arted to lessen 
together with the declining exchange rates and oil p rices. By predicting that 
these favorable developments would cause an obvious  break in inflation 
expectations the CBRT cut the interest rates by 3 poin ts on April 25, 2003. In 
fact, April inflation remained well below the marke t expectations, which were 
2,1 percent and 2,8 percent. Moreover, increases of p rivate manufacturing 
industrial prices stood at 0,7 percent. The depreciat ion in exchange rates 
continued in May and reduced the cost-push pressure s considerably. An improvement was observed in general business sentim ent. With the atmosphere 
of confidence and the removal of cost-push pressure s, the expectations have 
turned favorable since the mid-April. The year-end CPI inflation expectations, 
increasing from 24,8 percent in January to 28,4 percent in the first period of 
April, retreated to 26 percent in the second period o f May, although not 
satisfactory. 
9.  However, in the design of its interest rate policy  the CBRT is taking 
great pains in establishing whether the break in in flation trend is permanent or 
not. It is obvious that the failure or delay in tak ing steps specified under the 
program will immediately disrupt the favorable atmo sphere started in April. 
Such delays are leading to discrepancies between th ose who expect a fall in 
inflation and a reduction in short-term interest ra tes by looking at the current 
indicators only, and the CBRT’s expectations and eval uations that considers also 
the future course of fiscal policy and the variable s affecting inflation. 
10.    Since the beginning of May, the CBRT has observed  some delays in 
structural reforms and measures envisaged in the pr ogram such as restructuring 
the social security system and addressing the redun dancy in public sector. The 
CBRT has also observed the possibility of extra burde ns to the budget due to 
deficits in the energy sector, and the necessity of  taking some measures in 
order to meet the target of primary surplus. Under these conditions, a monetary 
authority that is focused on disinflation efforts s hould be well advised to be 
cautious in its decisions on interest rates, waitin g for the whole picture to 
become clearer. As a matter of fact, due to the dev elopments stated above the 
CBRT refrained from reducing interest rates in May.  
11.   However, the determination to achieve the program  targets has 
recently been observed during the 5 th . IMF Review, by compensating for the 
delays. In fact, some measures for improving the so cial security system, which is the biggest obstacle to reaching the year-end prima ry surplus target, have 
already been taken. Cost-reducing steps are being t aken in the energy sector. 
These developments are promising for the future inf lation.  
12.    Yesterday’s announced annual CPI inflation figur es as of May, which 
rose from 29,5 percent to 30,7 percent, should not be per ceived as unfavorable. 
The reason is twofold. First, as we have already an nounced, the downward trend 
in annual inflation rates will be observed starting  from the second half of the 
year. This can be accounted for the “base” effect c reated by fluctuations 
around the main downward trend in inflation during 2002. There are two distinct 
movements around this main trend in 2002: The seasonal ly adjusted monthly 
inflation rates during the first half of 2002 stood at  low levels due to nominal 
appreciation of Turkish lira and low rate of increa se in food prices. However, 
monthly inflation rates rose relatively in the seco nd half of the year owing to 
the high increments in public prices and the increa sing exchange rates following 
the political uncertainty occurred in May 2002. 
13. Second,  the developments  in agricultural and food prices, which are 
greatly influenced by natural conditions that are n ot under the control of 
economic policy, should be taken into account. Howe ver, for a healthy analysis of 
the main trend in inflation the course of consumer prices excluding foods 
becomes important.  In this framework, the annual CPI inflation figures  
excluding foods are giving promising signals for the  inflation trend. CPI inflation 
excluding foods has been falling since the first mon ths of 2002. The annual CPI 
inflation excluding foods, which stood at 31,5 percen t at the end of 2002, went 
down to 29,3 percent in April and to 28,6 percent in Ma y. Another promising 
development for the inflation dynamics is being obs erved in private 
manufacturing industry prices. Not much affected by  seasonality aspects, this 
index shows that the monthly prices have been on a d ownward trend since the New Year. As a matter of fact, the rate of increase  in private manufacturing 
industry prices, which stood at 3,6 percent in Januar y, came down to 1,6 percent 
in March, to 0,7 percent in April, and to 0,3 in May.  
14.   Despite the reduction in cost elements, the favor able expectations 
and developments in the consumer prices excluding fo ods and in the private 
manufacturing industry prices, a relaxation in fisca l discipline in the future will 
be a serious economic policy mistake. As the Centra l Bank we believe that the 
utmost care will be shown by those concerned in ord er not to commit such a 
policy mistake. The other sections in the economy m ust share the same belief, 
and must be convinced that i) the fiscal discipline  would be continued 
uncompromisingly for bringing inflation expectations  in line with the program 
targets, ii) public sector incomes policy would be implemented in line with the 
program targets and iii) structural reforms would b e completed as scheduled.  In 
this context, apart from the speed of structural ref orms, the increments in 
public sector wages and salaries will be a vital in dicator for the markets.   
 15.  On the other hand, domestic demand starts showing signals of revival 
in line with the increased confidence. Although it is early to pronounce a definite 
judgment, it is thought that the increase in domest ic demand is slightly limiting 
the downward trend in inflation. In the next period,  the fight against inflation 
will be greatly helped if the public sector as well  as private sector pursues their 
incomes and price-setting policies in line with the  inflation targets, and do not 
adopt an opportunistic behavior by taking advantage  of revived domestic demand 
to increase  their profit margins with short-term considerations . Otherwise, we 
have to underline once again that the fight against  inflation will become more 
difficult and costly. 
 
  III.  THE CENTRAL BANK INTEREST RATES  
16.  In the light of the evaluations above, starting fr om June 4, 2003, the 
CBRT has decided to cut short-term interest rates ap plied at CBRT Interbank 
Money Market and Repo-Reverse Repo Market at Istanb ul Stock Exchange as 
follows: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing interest rate was cut to 38 
percent from 41 percent and lending interest rate to  45 percent from 
48 percent. 
b)  Other Maturity:  One-week borrowing interest rate was cut to 38 
percent from 41 percent. 
c)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates:  In the framework of Late 
Liquidity Window application, the CBRT overnight len ding interest 
rate applicable between 16:00 – 16:30 at Interbank Money Market 
was cut to 50 percent from 53 percent. Borrowing interes t rate of 5 
percent remained the same. 
Moreover, the interest rates on overnight and one-w eek maturity borrowing 
facilities provided for primary dealer banks via re po transactions in the 
framework of open market operations were cut to 41 p ercent from 44 percent.  
 