13 June 2003
THE CBRT PRESS RELEASE

The Central Bank of Turkey (CBRT) continues to hold foreign exchange buying
auctions in the month of June as well, again in line with the principles set forth in the
press release of 5 May 2003. The said auctions were made public with press releases
on the 5th and 29th of May 2003, in connection with the excess foreign exchange
supply resulting from the reverse currency substitution process, also upon having
considered that a strong foreign exchange reserve position by the CBRT would help
boost market confidence in the current program.
It is decided to discontinue the practice of “the maximum bid price” as of 16 June
2003, all other rules of the foreign exchange buying auctions being the same. The
rationale behind this decision, which was taken according to the uninterrupted
communication process with the market participants, is explained below, in line with
‘the principle of transparency’ in monetary and exchange rate policy implementations.
As it is known, ‘the maximum bid price’ used to be calculated on the basis of ‘the
average value of the averages of the buying and selling rates as quoted by banks in the
interbank foreign exchange market for 1 USD’, in accordance with ‘The Rules for
Determining the Indicative Exchange Rates’ that were announced by our press release
no. 2002-25, dated 28 March 2002. Since the maximum price obtained as such
happened to be somewhat lower than the market price from time to time, it was
observed that the bid amounts were rather low especially in June, despite the foreign
exchange supply. In fact, the total amount of bids for 7 auctions out of 10 auctions
held in June remained below the announced maximum amount. The maximum bid
price fixed in all those 7 auctions remained below the best foreign exchange selling
prices of banks that offered price quotations in the bidding period of auction, and
therefore the planned amount of foreign exchange buying could not be achieved in
some days. With this amendment, it is aimed to buy the planned daily amount of
foreign exchange.
Moreover, as announced in our press release of 5 May 2003, the CBRT may,
with a prior notice, suspend the auctions before the end of the period in the cases
where the depth of foreign exchange market is lost due to an external shock or
unpredictable developments and excessive volatility is observed.

