Number:2003-49 
October 15, 2003 
PRESS RELEASE  
ON THE CBRT INTEREST RATE CUTS 
 
I- GENERAL ASSESSMENT 
1.  Fiscal discipline and monetary discipline are the s ine qua non 
conditions for disinflation efforts. As stated in t he press release titled “September 
Inflation and Outlook” issued in early October, the  atmosphere of confidence 
achieved as a result of the positive perceptions of  economic agents about the 
sustainability of the economic program brought alon g stabilization in exchange 
rates. Thus, the inflation continued the downward t rend not only through the input 
costs but also through the expectations. Moreover, the fact that the recovery in 
demand is not yet at a level that would put burden on production potential is 
another factor that backs up the downward trend in inflation. In September, annual 
CPI and WPI inflations dropped to 23 percent and 19 ,1 percent, respectively. These 
figures have strongly reinforced the perceptions th at the inflation target for end-
2003 would be achieved. 
2.  It is clear that the favorable trend in the inflati on can only be 
sustained by uninterrupted continuation of the fisc al discipline and the structural 
reform process. Within this framework, the determin ation in pursuing a public 
sector incomes policy, which is instrumental in inf lationary dynamics, in line with 
the 2004 inflation target, and the measures taken f or preserving the budgetary 
discipline for the rest of 2003 and also in 2004, a re all supporting our view that the 
Turkish economy will continue to move in the right path. 
3.  On the other hand, in the absence of exogenous shoc ks, a failure in 
achieving a satisfactory decline in inflation, desp ite the improvements in economic 
fundamentals, can only be attributed to unfavorable  expectations.  Therefore, 
matching the expected inflation rate with the targe ted inflation rate is of utmost 
importance. According to the results of the Expecta tions Survey for the first half of October, the year-end inflation expectations have f allen to 19,8 percent, below 
the year-end target of 20 percent, while the expect ations for the next 12 months 
have decreased to 16,5 percent. Considering that th e year-end inflation target for 
2004 has been set as 12 percent, it is obviously si gnificant to see inflation 
expectations coming closer to this target. It is al so clear, however, that this 
process needs to be accelerated even further. But t his alone may not suffice. What 
is more important is that, the improvement observed  in inflation expectations 
should also be reflected on the private sector wage  and price setting policies and 
on similar contracts for the next period. 
II. THE CENTRAL BANK INTEREST RATES 
4.  In the light of the evaluations above, starting fr om October 15, 2003, 
the CBRT has decided to cut short-term interest rat es applied at CBRT Interbank 
Money Market and Repo-Reverse Repo Market at Istanb ul Stock Exchange as follows: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing interest rate was cut to 26 
percent  from 29 percent and lending interest rate to 31 percent  from 
35 percent. 
b)  Interest Rates of Other Maturities:  One-week borrowing interest rate 
was cut to 26 percent  from 29 percent. 
c)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates:  In the framework of Late 
Liquidity Window application, the CBRT overnight bo rrowing interest 
rate applicable between 4:00 – 4:30 pm at Interbank  Money Market was 
cut to 36 percent  from 40 percent. Borrowing interest rate of 5 perc ent 
remained the same. 
Moreover, the interest rates on overnight and one-w eek maturity borrowing 
facilities provided for primary dealer banks via re po transactions in the framework 
of open market operations were cut to 28 percent  from 31 percent.  
 