No: 2003 - 20 
5 May 2003 
 
THE CBRT PRESS RELEASE 
ON THE PROGRAMMED FOREIGN EXCHANGE BUYING AUCTIONS 
  
Effective from 6 May 2003, the Central Bank of Turk ey (CBRT) has decided to 
hold daily foreign exchange buying auctions under t he framework of the following 
arrangements. 
As is known, it has been made public in the various  CBRT press releases that, 
in the cases where there is an excess foreign excha nge supply resulting from the 
reverse currency substitution process and the stron g balance of payments position, the 
CBRT might resume foreign exchange buying auctions with the aim of enhancing its 
foreign exchange reserves, without conflicting with  the floating exchange rate regime, 
and without disrupting the long-term trend and the natural equilibrium level of the 
exchange rate. 
In fact, the CBRT held foreign exchange buying auct ions for this purpose 
between April and June 2002, and purchased USD 795 million in total. However, the 
programmed foreign exchange buying auctions were in terrupted in July 2002 after 
observing somewhat artificial price formation in th e foreign exchange market since 
reverse currency substitution slowed down and the v olume of foreign exchange 
transactions was reduced due to political uncertain ties experienced in June 2002. 
However, it was repeatedly stated that developments  in balance of payments and 
reverse currency substitution process had been clos ely monitored by the CBRT and 
that foreign exchange buying auctions could be re-s tarted by announcing in advance.  
In evaluating the reverse currency substitution, th e foreign exchange deposits, 
excluding interbank deposits, showed a constant upw ard trend along with domestic 
and international developments until December 2002 starting from July 2002 when the 
CBRT foreign exchange buying auctions were halted. It was observed that the foreign 
exchange deposits remained stable in the period of January-February 2003. Foreign 
exchange deposits started to decline in early March  2003 together with the 
depreciation of Turkish lira following the rejectio n of the motion allowing the 
deployment of foreign troops on Turkish soil  by  the  Turkish Parliament and the 
commencement of Iraqi war. The total foreign exchan ge deposits, which stood at USD 
47,6 billion as of 28 February 2003, decreased to U SD 45,5 billion (provisional data) 
as of 18 April 2003, decreasing by USD 2,1 billion.  
From the standpoint of evaluating the reverse curre ncy substitution process, it is 
important to examine whether the amounts withdrawn from foreign exchange deposits 
have gone out of the banking system or invested in Turkish lira instruments. It was 
observed that, a substantial part of the withdrawn foreign exchange deposits has 
switched to Turkish lira investment instruments due  to developments between 28 
February and 18 April 2003, while the amounts going  out of the banking system have remained limited. In this period, the total amount of Turkish lira deposits, repos, 
mutual funds and Government Debt Securities (GDS) t hat are owned by individual and 
institutional investors and are held in the bank ac counts have increased to TL 127,3 
quadrillion from TL 119,3 quadrillion, showing a no minal increase of 6,7 percent. 
Of the TL 8 quadrillion increase in the investment instruments, a sizeable amount 
of TL 6,3 quadrillion is accounted for the increase  in GDS that are held and owned by 
individual and institutional investors. The total G DS held with the banks by individual 
and institutional investors have increased to TL 53 ,7 quadrillion as of 18 April 2003 
from TL 47,4 quadrillion on 28 February 2003. 
During the same period, as the decline in foreign e xchange deposits mainly 
materialized in March 2003 when portfolio shifts to ok place to take advantage of 
rising exchange rates and interest rates, the devel opments in April 2003 should be 
evaluated separately. In April 2003, it is observed  that the decline in foreign exchange 
deposits have stopped, and the total foreign exchan ge deposits have realized as USD 
45,5 billion (provisional data) as of 18 April 2003 , which was USD 45,1 billion as of 
28 March 2003, increasing by USD 0,4 billion only. This increase has resulted from 
the fact that the foreign exchange banknotes held o utside the banking system began to 
flow back to the system in late March 2003. Accordi ng to the provisional data 
obtained from banks, during the period between 27 M arch and 30 April approximately 
USD 950 million foreign banknotes entered into the system. Accordingly, the foreign 
exchange deposits have increased to a limited exten t, and the residents’ demand for 
Turkish lira investment instruments has continued. The residents’ total Turkish lira 
investments have increased to TL 127,3 quadrillion as of 18 April 2003, from TL 
124,9 quadrillion on 28 March 2003. 
In addition, the reinforced fiscal discipline by ex tra measures taken in 2003 
budget, the completion of the fourth review with th e IMF, the promising budget 
performance in recent months and the realizations o f certain measures taken for 
achieving fiscal discipline are all increasing the likelihood of the continuation of 
excess supply in foreign exchange, together with th e favorable prospects in balance of 
payments in summer months. 
In view of the above analysis, the CBRT has decided  to resume foreign exchange 
buying auctions by considering that its strong rese rve position will boost the market’s 
confidence in the current program. As it was the ca se in 2002, the CBRT does not 
target any specific reserve level. The aim here is to enhance the CBRT’s foreign 
exchange reserve position in a way the excess forei gn exchange supply does not create 
an extra volatility in exchange rates and disturb t he foreign exchange liquidity and 
foreign exchange positions of the banks, without ta rgeting any exchange rate level. 
As in 2002, the monthly programs of foreign exchang e buying auctions will be 
announced in advance. However, The CBRT may, with a  prior notice, suspend the 
auctions before the end of the period in the cases where the depth of foreign exchange 
market is lost; and excessive volatility is observe d in exchange rates due to an external 
shock or unpredictable developments. 
The foreign exchange buying auctions will be subjec t to the following rules. 
 Rules for Foreign Exchange Buying Auction: 
1.  The total amount of daily foreign exchange buying w ill be USD 20 million. 
However, auctions will not be held on the public ho lidays in the United States, 
even if they coincide with the working days in Turk ey. Auctions will not also be 
held on half working days since there is no indicat ive exchange rate fixing on these 
days. Accordingly, in May 2003 there will be foreig n exchange auctions on 17 
working days except for 26 May 2003, which is holid ay in the USA. 
2.  In the event that there is no bid at all, or the to tal of the bids are less than USD 20 
million, the amount of daily auction can be increas ed up to USD 40 million by 
starting with the first subsequent tender in order to compensate the foreign 
exchange that is not purchased. In other words, eve n if the total amount of foreign 
exchange which could not be bought surpasses USD 20  million, the amount to be 
added to daily amount of USD 20 million for compens ation will be limited to USD 
20  million. However, the amount of foreign exchange th at has been programmed 
but could not be purchased in the previous month wi ll not be compensated in the 
auctions to be held in the subsequent month. 
3.  Banks and special finance houses (institutions) aut horized to operate in the Foreign 
Exchange and Banknotes Markets are allowed to parti cipate in the auction. 
4.  Auctions are to be held under the multiple-price au ction method. 
5.  The maximum bid price will be the arithmetic averag e of the first five observations 
obtained the same day in accordance with the “Rules  for Fixing the Indicative 
Exchange Rates” made public by the CBRT press relea se dated 28 March 2002 No: 
2002-25. The maximum price thus obtained and the to tal amount of the auction 
including the amount to be compensated will be post ed on the CBRT’s Reuters 
page “CBTQ”. 
6.  Institutions may bid between 14.40 and 15.00. 
7.  Minimum amounts that can be bid for is USD 1 millio n and its multiples. The 
maximum amount that can be bid for is limited to th e total amount stated in the 
auction.  
8.  Institutions cannot change their bid amounts and pr ices during the auction. 
9.  If there is more than one bid at the price the auct ion is cut, the distribution will be 
made on a pro-rata basis. 
10.   Institutions willing to participate in the auction s will send in their bids by stating 
their price and amounts through the telephone numbe rs 3091966-89 of the Foreign 
Exchange and Banknotes Markets Division.  
11.   Auction results showing the total bid amount, aver age, maximum and minimum 
prices will be posted on the CBRT’s Reuters page of  “CBTQ”. 
12.   No transaction commission will be charged. 
13.   Institutions that do not fulfill their obligations  arising from the auctions will be 
subject to the sanctions as specified in the Standi ng Order of the Foreign Exchange 
and Banknote Markets. 