Number: 2003-43 
September 18, 2003 
PRESS RELEASE 
ON THE CBRT INTEREST RATE CUTS 
 I. GENERAL ASSESSMENT  
1.  The primary objective of the Central bank of Turke y (CBRT) is to 
achieve price stability as stipulated in its Law. S hort-term interest rates, which 
are the main policy instrument of the CBRT, are adju sted by considering to 
which extent the future trend of inflation is compat ible with the inflation 
target.  
2.  As has been announced several times by the CBRT, th ere are a series 
of variables influencing inflation. The common conv iction of various academicians 
who have studied the inflationary process in Turkey  is that the main variables 
shaping the course of inflation are i) the rate of increase in exchange rate, ii) 
the expectations about the future trend of inflation , iii) the prices in long-term 
contracts made in line with these expectations such as wage increases, and iv) 
the demand pressure determined according to the dir ection and the size of 
discrepancy between the current output level and th e potential output level. 
3.  It is no doubt that, the main determinant of the m ovements in those 
variables affecting inflation and real interest rat es is the current economic 
policies. In this context, especially fiscal policy comes first, the reason being 
the still high level of public sector debt, despite  its downward trend under the 
current program. Fiscal discipline is the primary c ondition for reducing the ratio 
of public debt to GNP permanently. Such a declining  trend will boost the public 
confidence in debt sustainability and real interest  rates will come down, inflation 
expectations will improve further and exchange rates  will stabilize. Such an environment, which would ensure a lasting downward trend in inflation, is also a 
pre-condition for a sustainable growth, as the incr eased confidence would boost 
private sector’s consumer and investor spending.  
II. OUTLOOK 
4. Having left behind the first 8 months of 2003, both the current 
inflation trend and the movements in the variables affecting this trend are 
giving favorable signals for the future course of i nflation. Inflation has now a 
significant downward trend. Stability observed in e xchange rates in the last few 
months coupled with the steady decline in expected i nflation rates is promising 
for the future inflation. The level of production i s converging with the potential 
level of production, however this is not believed t o pose any threat for attaining 
the end-year inflation target.   
5. The continuation of this favorable outlook depends on the fiscal 
discipline. As we have mentioned in our latest pres s release regarding inflation 
developments, every step to be taken for the contin uation of fiscal discipline 
and every piece of new information in this regard w ill minimize the risk of a 
persisting inflation. In September, we have witness ed promising developments in 
this regard. 
6.  Firstly, top authorities have announced that incom es policy will be 
implemented consistently with both 2003 and 2004 inflation  targets. 
Adjustment of incomes policy in line with the targe ted inflation is essential in 
respect of easing the pressure of production costs on the prices, maintaining 
favorable course of inflationary expectations, and e liminating the inertia that is 
gradually losing its importance. Another promising factor for the budget 
discipline is that in these announcements the dange r of populist policies that 
would harm budget discipline producing unfavorable results in the future has 
been underlined. 7.  Secondly, primary budget surplus realized at a hig h level in August. It 
is well known that the stable course of exchange ra tes has a positive effect on 
the State Economic Establishments in general. Hence , a significant progress has 
been made in achieving public sector primary surplu s target for end-2003. Here, 
it will be helpful to underline that the budget rea lizations may display notable 
volatility month by month. Besides, the effects of s ome measures taken for 
establishing budget discipline are observed in dela ys. For the continuation of 
this confident atmosphere, the significance of curr ent developments in respect 
of the end-year targets should be well understood b y everybody. It is apparent 
that the public needs to be informed of these devel opments in a more detailed 
manner. Thus, for example the fluctuations arising from the speculations about 
the July primary budget surplus would have never be en observed if there had 
been sufficient information. 
 8. Another encouraging development for the future infl ation is the 
relative drop in crude oil prices in recent weeks. Furthermore, it is observed 
that excess foreign exchange supply is still continui ng. In other words, it seems 
unlikely that the current stability of Turkish lira  against other currencies will 
deteriorate by negatively affecting the downward tr end in inflation, provided 
that the current economic policy is strictly implem ented. 
 9. Finally, another point that should be emphasized is  the seasonal 
fluctuations observed in monthly inflation figures.  Especially consumer inflation 
realizes at higher levels in autumn months compared  to summer months due to 
the seasonal factors. Therefore, it will be helpful  to consider this fact while 
evaluating the inflation figures to be announced in  the coming months.   
 
  III. THE CENTRAL BANK INTEREST RATES  
10. In the light of the evaluations above, starting fro m September 18, 
2003, the CBRT has decided to cut short-term interest ra tes applied at CBRT 
Interbank Money Market and Repo-Reverse Repo Market  at Istanbul Stock 
Exchange as follows: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing interest rate was cut to 29 
percent from 32 percent and lending interest rate to 35 percent 
from 38 percent. 
b)  Interest Rates of Other Maturities:  One-week borrowing interest 
rate was cut to 29 percent from 32 percent. 
c)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates:  In the framework of Late 
Liquidity Window application, the CBRT overnight bor rowing interest 
rate applicable between 16:00 – 16:30 at Interbank Money Market 
was cut to 40 percent from 43 percent. Borrowing interes t rate of 5 
percent remained the same. 
Moreover, the interest rates on overnight and one-w eek maturity borrowing 
facilities provided for primary dealer banks via re po transactions in the 
framework of open market operations were cut to31 pe rcent from 34 percent.  
   