No: 2003-12 
  March 20, 2003 
CENTRAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY 
PRESS RELEASE  
The Central Bank has put the following measures int o effect with the aim of minimizing 
the adverse effects of the military operation to Ir aq that started on March 20, 2003 on 
domestic markets, preserving what we have accomplis hed so far on the way to achieving 
price stability, and maintaining the banking and fi nancial stability.  
A)  TL Money Market 
Currently, the amount of liquidity in the Turkish l ira money markets is adequate to meet 
the liquidity needs of the financial system. Howeve r, the Central Bank has made the following 
arrangements in order to meet an additional liquidi ty need that might emerge in the markets: 
• The interest rate charged for funding the banks wit hout any limit via the “Late 
Liquidity Window”  facility at the Interbank Money Market operating u nder the 
Central Bank, currently operating between 16:00-16: 30 has been decreased by 5 
points to 56 percent.  
• On the other hand, when necessary, the Central Bank  will also provide O/N 
funding at the Istanbul Stock Exchange Repurchase M arket at 51 percent. 
B)  Foreign Exchange Market 
The foreign exchange balance, and the level of fore ign exchange liquidity in the banking 
system have been strengthened as a result of the Ce ntral Bank’s strict implementation of the 
floating exchange-rate regime that was initiated in  February 2001, and due to the fact that 
banks have attached great importance to their excha nge-rate risk management. The Central 
Bank has taken the following measures for the smoot h functioning of the foreign exchange 
market in order to meet the additional demand for f oreign exchange that might occur in the 
market due to extraordinary conditions we face tada y. 
• Banks will be provided with one-week maturity forei gn exchange deposit facility 
within their limit of borrowing in the Foreign Exch ange Deposit Market at the 
Central Bank. As of today, the interest rate to be applied to the said deposits has 
been cut down to 8 percent from 12 percent.  
• All necessary preparations have been made and the a mount of foreign currency 
banknotes held at the branches of the Central Bank has been increased to meet 
demand for foreign currency banknotes that might em erge in this period. In this 
context, the demand for foreign currency banknotes against foreign exchange of all 
the institutions authorized to operate in the Forei gn Exchange and Foreign 
Banknotes Markets with the Central Bank will be met .  
• The current economic program had important achievem ents on the way to price 
stability which is the main target of the Central B ank and it is of utmost 
importance to minimize the volatility in foreign ex change that might risk those 
achievements.  We have no doubt that the players in  the financial system will 
show the common sense needed at this sensitive peri od. Nonetheless, the Central 
Bank will closely monitor the  excessive volatility  that might occur in exchange 
rates due to liquidity shortage in the market, or s peculative actions and as before, 
will directly intervene in the event of an excessiv e volatility that might occur in 
both directions. 