Number: 2003-2
January 3, 2003

PRESS RELEASE

GENERAL FRAMEWORK OF THE MONETARY AND
EXCHANGE RATE POLİCY IN 2003

A- — THE IMPORTANCE OF PRİCE STABİLİTY

1. — We have just left behind 2002, which marked a significant milestone
towards the stabilization of the economy. İn 2002 the Turkish people came
to understand how important it is to achieve price stability, being the

precondition of a sustainable growth and high employment.

2. — Economic growth does not conflict at all with the price stability in the
medium- and İong-term. Various international studies have shown that there
is a strong correlation between price stability and growth. The average
growth rate is higher in the low-inflation countries where price stability is

attained, whereas it is lower in the countries that suffer from high inflation.

3. In fact, it can be observed that also in Turkey there has been an
inverse relationship between growth and inflation in the last 30-years.
Examining the ten-year periods in Turkey, we can cleariy see that the
average inflation rate has increased, while the growth rate has slowed down

on öone hand, the output and employment İevel have become increasingly
unstable on the other. Despite this fact, we see that some arguments are
being put forward claiming that a İooser monetary policy or a little inflation
could relieve the employment problem and boost the economic growth. This
misleading idea is based on the view that according to the Article 4 of the
Central Bank Law concerning fundamental duties and powers, the Central
Bank could well support the growth and employment policies of the
Government in the post-crisis recession and so the economy could recover
gulckly. However, the same Article states openly that the primary objective
of the Central Bank is the price stability, and the Central Bank will support
the Göovernment's growth and employment policies on condition that they do
not conflict with the price stability. In other words, after having
experienced many crises, what Turkey needs most is the sustainable growth
and this will be possible only if the price stability is achieved. Our country
has been living with countless crises in the last 30 years. What our country
has lacked in the medantime are sustainable growth and sustainable
employment level, which is possible only if inflation is reduced to single digit

levels.

4.- Inflation is not onİy an economic problem, but also a social and a moral
problem. As we often explain to the public under the heading of "price
stability,” if the drawbacks of inflation are better understood by al| sectors

of the economy, the fight against inflation will become easier.

5. Many stabilization programs have been implemented in order to
reduce the inflation that our country has been faced with for nearly 30

years. As a matter of fact, although some of these programs have succeeded
in bringing down the inflation rate, political instability, delays in structural
reforms, and İlack of fiscal discipline due to short-term political

considerations have made these achievements temporary.

6. — The absence of a lasting success in the fight against inflation has
caused the economic units to consider every new stabilization program as
“business as usual". This lack of confidence has become an obstacle to elicit
much needed public support for programs. For that reason, every new
stabilization program has İost its credibility simply at the beginning, and the

ambitious targets have been far from convincing.

B- AN EVALUATION OF THE MONETARY POLİCY IN 2002

7. The current economic stabilization program that was initiated in 2002
aims at bringing inflation down to 12 percent in a three-year period, and then
to single digits. However, this program differs greatly from the previous
programs. İn fact, the current program got started on a solid footing by
making use of several advantages the other past programs did not have.
These were; the amendments made in the Central Bank Law for the Central
Bank independence, the radical measures taken for a healthy banking system,
the realization of basic structural reforms to a great extent by gaining
momentum in 2001 and 2002, and the measures taken for the continuation of

fiscal discipline. All of them are important for achieving a stable economy.

8. At the beginning, the targets of the 2002 program were considered

as being somewhat ambitious by markets according to the then prevailing
conditions. The annual inflation target was calculated as 35 percent, the
primary surplus was determined to be 6,5 percent of the GNP, and the GNP

growth rate was envisaged to be 3 percent.

9. Several assumptions were made when designing the 2002 monetary
and exchange rate policy that was announced on January 2, 2002. İt was
assumed that there would not be any deviation from the budget discipline,
and economic reforms including the banking reform that were initiated in
2001 and aimed at laying the foundation of a İong-term sustainable economic
growth would continue uninterruptediy. It was believed that these measures

would eliminate concerns over the sustainability of public debt stock.

10. In the 2002 monetary policy, it was planned to conduct a monetary
policy strategy focused on the future inflation, which is called as "implicit
inflation targeting". ÜUnder this strategy, although targets for base-money
are fixed as of periods consistent with the inflation target, monetary policy
decisions are essentiallıy made by considering the developments in future
inflation. With this dual strategy, it is aimed to solve the problems created
by difficulties in estimating the money demand in the process of declining
inflation and currency substitution, as well as by weak relationship between
monetary aggregates and inflation witnessed in recent years. Therefore, the
implicit inflation targeting has become a strong anchor beside base money.
UÜnder the floating exchange rate regime it has been stated that short-term
interest rates, which is the main policy instrument, would be used actively

for the price stability goal only.
11.. In 2002, it was foreseen that the floating exchange rate regime
consistent with the economic foundations would be fully established. In this
framework, the Central Bank announced in the New Year that it would
intervene in a limited manner to exchange rates only to prevent excessive
volatility without targeting a certain İevel. Moreover, the Central Bank
announced that it would hold foreign exchange buying avctions in order to

ihncrease foreign exchange reserves.

12. At the start of 2002, 35 percent inflation target, and 3 percent
growth target were found unrealistic to reach, as it has been in the past
programs. The annual inflation expectation for 2002 was 48,3 percent, 13
percent above the target at the beginning of the year, while the growth
expectation was 2,7 percent, 0,3 point below the predicted 3 percent

growth.

13. However, the bubble in the exchange rate, which had emerged
starting from June 2001, exploded thanks to the strong support provided by
international institutions in view of the assurance given by the government
that there would be no deviation from the fiscal discipline also in 2002, as
well as the expectations for a strict implementation of an ambitious and
consistent economic program. Accordingiy, exchange rates showed a
downward trend in real and nominal terms until April 2002. Persistence in
tight fiscal and monetary policies and continuation of structural reforms
increased the confidence of the public in the program. Inflation dropped to
lower levels due to sluggish domestic demand and the downward trend of

exchange rates along with the increased confidence in the program. In the
beginning of June, the gap between the year-end inflation expectation and
the year-end inflation target, which can be considered as the measure of the
credibility of the Central Bank, narrowed from 13 points to (minus) - 0,6

point. This was achieved for the first time after İong years.

14 During this period, an apparent reverse currency substitution process
started in line with the improvement in inflation and inflation expectations.
İn other words, residents began converting their foreign currency savings
into Turkish-lira denominated investment instruments. For this reason, the
Central Bank decided to enhance its foreign reserves by means of foreign
exchange buying auctions. On the other hand, expected real interest rates

dropped to 15 percent in parallel to the recovery in expectations.

15. — Starting from May 20032, exchange rates and interest rates entered
into an upward trend markedlİy, as a result of the perception of political
uncertainty and the concerns over the sustainability of the current program.
The rise in exchange rates boosted the inflation trend temporarily. In this
process, the Central Bank stated several times that the concerns were
exaggerated and the İlikely negative impact of elections would not do a
significant harm to the Turkish economy, since the majority of structural
reforms were already realized. The Central Bank also expressed that the
implementation of an election economy to the extent as experienced in the
previous years was out of guestion, and it was highly likely that the current
economic program would be sustained in the next period as well, without

diverging from its fundamental principles.
16. The Central Bank set the short-term interest rates, the main
monetary policy instrument in 2002, exclusively within the framework of its
primary objective of price stability, and pursued a policy focused on the
future inflation under the principles that were announced in the beginning of
the year. In line with the favorable developments in inflation, short-term
interest rates were cut six times during 2002. Overnight borrowing interest
rate was decreased from 59 percent to 44 percent, while one-week

borrowing interest rate Trom 62 percent to 44 percent.

17. Starting from August 2002, exchange rates started to stabilize.
Moreover, the Turkish lira had appreciated until earİy December resulting
from the expectations that the new göovernment would stick to the current
stability program after the general elections, and the favorable responses
by domestic and Toreign investors to the important steps taken in the
process of accession to in the European Union. Furthermore, a remarkable
improvement was observed in the expectations concerning the general

economic situation starting from September 2002.

18. —However, when it was understood that the primary surplus target for
2002 could not be reached, expectations began arising for necessity of
taking concrete measures in order to eliminate the causes thereof, which
might happen again. İn addition, certain steps that caused concerns about
the continuation of structural reforms and fiscal discipline had a negative
impact on expectations, even though these steps were abandoned. Along with
these reasons, the Irag issue pushed the real interest rates up as a potential

exogenous factor.
19. At this point, it should be kept in mind that in countries with high
debt stock, the expectations concerning the sustainability of domestic debt
would determine the fundamental dynamics of these economies. There is no
doubt that reinforcing the economic foundations via fiscal and monetary
measures, and making radical changes in the economic structure that İeads
to loose policies will have a positive impact on these expectations. But these
alone are not sufficient. Providing accurate and clear signals concerning the
current program and the additional measures to be taken is vital as well, in

order to help shape expectations.

20. — Despite the perception of political uncertainty and the climate of
election, it is estimated that the inflation will realize at about 31 percent,
which is 4 points lower than the annual target of 35 percent, while the
growth at about 6.5 percent, more than two times than the estimated 3
percent. Actually, the Central Bank announced the potential sources of
growth in the very beginning of 2002, and the developments materialized in
this direction. These favorable developments took place thanks to the
structural reforms, tight fiscal policies, despite some delays in the second
half of the year, and the Central Bank's monetary policy, which is exclusively
focused on inflation. When the inflationary developments during the last two
years are examined, reducing the inflation rate from the 70's percent İlevel
by averting the danger of hyperinflation that might have arisen due to the
monetary expansion after the February 2001 crisis, and despite the
resistance of certain sectors, to the 30's percent level - the lowest level of

the last two decades- should be deemed a great success. Nevertheless, this
does not change the fact that Türkey is still among the countries with the

highest inflation rate.

21.. Ön the other hand, the monetary targets specified in the 2002
monetary policy were reached. The base money, which is used as nominal
anchor in the monetary program, realized at TL 10.720 trillion calculated on
the average of the last 5 working days of December 2002, remaining below

the target of TL 10.850 trillion.

C- — MONETARY POLİCY STRATEĞY FOR 2003

22. Pursuant to the Central Bank Law, the inflation target is set
jointly by the Government and the Central Bank. The inflation target for
2003 has been set as 20 percent, and the growth rate has been forecast as
5 percent as announced through the joint press release of the Ministry of
State and the Central Bank on December 17, 2002. If the slippage in the
public finance is adjusted and the fiscal discipline is maintained, if the
principles of the current program are fulfilled and the structural reforms
are carried out, it will be possible to maintain the favorable economic
developments in 2003 as well, despite the external shocks such as Irag
issue. İn this context, it seems very İikely to meet the inflation target of 20
percent, and the growth forecast of 5 percent, which have been set Tor

2003 together with the Government.
23. As was the case in 2002, the 2003 monetary policy of the Central
Bank will again rest upon price stability goal, as stated in the amended Law:
and the short-term interest rates, as the main monetary policy instrument,
will be used actively to attain the inflation target exclusively. The "implicit
inflation targeting” strategy, the success of which was proven in 2002, will
be pursued until we openly initiate the inflation targeting regime, and the
short-term interest rates will be determined according to the future
inflation. The base money will continue to function as a supplementary
anchor. However, it is not possible to fight against inflation by merely using
monetary policy. The battle against inflation cannot be won unless Tiscal
discipline is ensured and the reform process affecting expectations directİy
is implemented without interruption. Therefore, the uninterrupted
implementation of Tiscal discipline and reforms will be necessary for the
success of the disinflation efforts. It should be born in mind that the
ultimate goal is achieving price stability, and it can only be attained with a

long-run struggle without any relaxation.

24.. The Central Bank has completed the technical groundwork for
transition to inflation targeting regime. İn this context, short- and mediumterm inflation estimation models have been set up;: surveys have been
conducted to evaluate the expectations of economic agents for inflation, and
the general course of the economy; detailed studies have been conducted on
inflation developments, and the results have been made public. Moreover,
the Central Bank is ready for the inflation targeting in terms of its duties
and responsibilities entrusted by the amendments made to its Law. However,

the success of inflation targeting regime calls for a predictable fiscal policy,
in addition to the preparations made by the Central Bank. Accordingiy, the
exact date of the initiation of the official inflation-targeting regime will be
announced after the targets of fiscal and incomes policies for 2003 have

been finalized, and the effects of the external factors have been evaluated.

25. With regard to price stability, 2003 holds favorable developments
as well as important risks. The formation of a stable government after the
elections, the positive economic growth, the fact that the floating exchange
rate regime that enables the Central Bank to focus on inflation has got
established largely, and the better inflation prospects compared with early
2002 are the principal favorable developments. Actualiy, while the gap
between the inflation expectations and the targeted inflation was 13 points
in 2002, the same gap for 2003 has come down below 5 points. This provides

evidence that the confidence in the program has increased.

26. Risks can be divided into two groups as the ones emerging Trom
external shocks, and those stemming from the policies implemented and
economic — developments. The developments concerning Irag constitute a
major external shock probability. It is evident that a military operation in
İIrag would create pressure on exchange rates, and on oiİl prices at least for
a certain period, and would have adverse effects on the Turkish economy.
The adverse effects of such an operation on the general course of the
economy, and on the inflation will be minimized, if the markets are
persuaded in the continuation of structural reforms and the public finance
discipline. The internal risks are as follows; inflation pressure exerted by

increase in domestic demand, persistence in the backward İooking pricing
behavior, failure to restore fiscal discipline, obstacles to the reform process
-especially to the banking reforms- and mismanagement of inflationary

expectations.

27. TIt is essential to make a clear distinction between the risks stemming
from economic developments we can almost fully control, and the risks
stemming from external shocks like Trag over which we have either little or
no control at all. It should be born in mind that, even if it were not for the
İIrag risk, adverse external shocks like the "event of September 11" or
natural disasters are likely to occur. Therefore, we must absolutely stick to
the economic stability efforts to lessen the vulnerability of economy to

external shocks.

28. The growth rate, which is expected to be around 6.5 percent in
2002, stems mainly from the building up of inventories that have reached
their normal levels again due to high exports performance and demand
expectations, despite the İlagged recovery in the Euvropean econonmy.
Meanwhile, increase in consumption and investment spending has remained
limited. The 2003 growth forecast of 5 percent is mainliy based on the
expectation that investment and consumption expenditures will increase,
along with the continuation of increase in exports. Within this framework,
domestic demand is expected to pick up substantialliy in 2003 with the
return of confidence. At this point, the private sector pricing and incomes
policies will become as much important as the public sector pricing, salary
and wage policies. İncrements in public prices, especially of public wages and

salaries, which are considered as a test for the Government in fighting
inflation, will have a direct effect on the expectations. Also, it has been
earlier stated in the press releases of the Central Bank that any revival in
domestic demand should not be perceived by the private sector as an
opportunity to increase their profit margins. This is very important for the
disinflation efforts, as well as for minimizing the cost of disinflation
process. It should be underlined once again that any cut in interest rates will
only be possible if the inflation rate comes close to the targeted level, when
it is considered that the Central Bank sets the interest rates with the
ultimate goal of attaining price stability and within the framework of the
inflation target. Therefore, the sustainability of a revived domestic demand
can onİy be achieved if the private sector determines its pricing and incomes
policies in line with the targeted inflation. The restructuring process in the
public sector should also be pursued by the private sector, and the
profitability should depend on the productivity increase. Conseguentiİy,
bearing in mind the economic, social and moral damages of inflation, the
disinflation process must be supported actively. Such behavior will be in the

benefit of all sectors of the economy.

29. Monitoring the inflationary expectations in a constructive way is
an important factor in the success of disinflation efforts. Inflation
expectations can be easily affected in the worst way, just by giving an
impression of a deviation from the current program or the structural
reforms -especially the banking reform-, even if there is actualliy no
intention of it. Therefore, it is very important for the success of the
program that each and every economic unit sticks to the program being

implemented, fulfills its duties in coordination with other institutions. The
public must be convinced that there will be no deviation from the main track.
At this very point, the primary surplus becomes a significant element of the
economic program. A primary surplus target that is consistent with the
economic policy will alleviate the debt sustainability problem, which in turn
decreases the risk premium. Any decrease in the risk premium will bring
down the real interest rates, making the rollover process smoother.
İncreasing the capacity of debt rollover will stimulate an improvement in the
expectations and confidence, alleviating the economic revival and the
disinflation efforts. Within this framework, in countries where debt rollover
is a problem due to high debt stock, a higher primary surplus is not an
obstacle to growth, but mostİy a contributing factor. Therefore, also in
Turkey where sustainability of domestic debt is a major problem, the loose
fiscal policies designed to improve income distribution or to accelerate the
economic growth will yield just the opposite results. Income distribution will
further deteriorate and the economy will not be able to grow due to high

interest rates.

D- LIĞUIDITY MANAGEMENT AND EXCHANGE RATE POLİCY IN
2003

30. After the February 2001 crisis, the Central Bank purchased
gövernment securities from state-owned banks and the banks transferred to
the Saving Deposits Insurance Fund in order to meet their short-term
İiguidity needs, and this, in turn, created a substantial amount of excess

liguidity in the market. This excess İiguidity prevailed throughout 2002 and
reached TL 9.7 guadrillion as end of 2002. Since excess İiguidity is expected
to persist in 2003, we do not predict any İiguidity shortage to occur.

31. The Central Bank considers financial stability as a supportive goal
reguired for the effective implementation of the policies destined to price
stability. Therefore, the Central Bank, whose legal duty is to ensure price
stability, will continue to protect Tinancial stability as always without
endangering the price stability goal together with other institutions
concerned. Hence, the liguidity management policies of the Central Bank for
2002 and 2003 have been designed in a way to preserve financial stability
without putting the price stability objective at risk.

32. As a preparation for inflation targeting strategy, and within the
framework of the modern central banking practices, important changes were
made in the operational structure of the monetary policy in 2002.
Therefore, no substantial changes are to be made in 2003. Excess İiguidity
will continue to be withdrawn through Turkish lira deposit transactions in
the Interbank Money Market, and reverse repos at the Istanbul Stock
Exchange Repo-Reverse Repo Market under the open market operations. At
this point, it would be helpful to reiterate the Central Bank's current market

arrangements for liguidity management:

a) — The intermediation function of the Central Bank in the Interbank
Money Market (DLMM) and Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Market
(FEBM), which started to be gradualliy abandoned in March 2002,

has been terminated on December 2, 2002. However, this
arrangement does not generate any İimitation on the Turkish lira
and foreign exchange liguidity available to the banks via these
markets. The Turkish lira and foreign exchange İiguidity needed by
the system will continue to be met through the below mentioned

arrangements.

b) — Banks will continue doing transactions within their limits making
use of the Central Bank rates in the interbank money market
between 10:00 a.m. - 16:00 p.m. Moreover, in order to meet the
temporary daily liguidity needs in the system, the Central Bank will
continue to provide the "Daylight Overdraft Limit" (DOL) facility
to banks within their borrowing limits between 09:00 a.m.-15:00

p.m.

c) — The Central Bank will continue to provide "late liguidity window”
facility in the interbank money market between 16:00 p.m. and
16:30 p.m. as the "lender of last resort." Banks can borrow from
the “late liguidity window” at the Central Bank lending rate without
any İimit, provided that their demands are Tully collateralized, and

can İend money at the Central Bank borrowing rate.

d) — The Central Bank will continue to provide TL liguidity to the
primary dealers through open market operations. As is known, as of
July 22, 2002, the primary dealers are provided with limited
liguidity through open market operations, which amounts to a
maximum of 10 percent of the TL denominated and non-redeemed
gövernment securities that they will purchase from the primary

market. The interest rates on the repurchase transactions carried
out within the framework of this liguidity facility extended to
primary dealers shall not exceed the average of the lending and
borrowing interest rates, which in turn will be an important factor

that will prevent volatility in the short-term interest rates.

e) — As mentioned above, the markets are expected to open with
excess Turkish lira liguidity for a long time. However, in the event
of a temporary Turkish lira liguidity shortage that might occur, the
Central Bank will begin to inject liguidity through guick repo
tenders. Guick repo tenders will be used actively to hinder
excessive rise of the daily overnight interest rates, (reaching the
Central Bank lending rates).

f) In line with the arrangements in the interbank money market, the
Central Bank has also abandoned its intermediation role in the
foreign exchange deposits market. However, the Central Bank will
continue iİts intermediation function limited to the foreign
exchange deposits of the Sstate-owned banks that were

transferred from the banks under rehabilitation in 2001.

33. — When the above mentioned arrangements are taken into consideration,
it can be seen that, besides the normal liguidity management, we have
sufficient instruments at hand to prevent a İiguidity shortage, which would
put the sound operation of the markets in danger, and a volatility of shortterm TL interest rates, in the event of any probable external shock.
Furthermore, the general framework of the current monetary policy and the

floating exchange rate regime enables the Central Bank to actively conduct
its function of “Lender of Last Resort", in contrast to the guasi-currency
board system based on a currency-peg regime and a İimitation on Net
Domestic Assets before February 2001. Within this framework, the Central
Bank will be able to promptly take the necessary measures to enable the
markets to operate efficientİy, and to prevent excessive volatility in shortterm interest rates in the event of any probable external shock. As a matter
of fact, after the developments of September 11, 2001 the measures taken
for preventing excessive volatility in interest rates and for the smooth

operation of the payments system have proved their efficiencey.

34. The floating exchange rate regime will be carried on in 2003, the
exchange rates will be determined according to the market conditions. The
Central Bank will not purchase or sell foreign exchange in any manner in
order to determine an exchange rate İevel or its direction. As has been so
far, the Central Bank will intervene under limited conditions either by
purchasing or selling foreign exchange, in case of excessive volatility in
exchange rates. On the other hand, uünder the floating exchange rate
regime, achieving exchange rate stability with minimum Central Bank
intervention is very important for the inflation targeting regime to be
initiated in 2003 as previousİy stated by the Central Bank at various
occasions. Contrary to the currency-peg regime implemented prior to
February 2001, exchange rates uünder the floating rate regime are
determined in the market as a result of the economic policy, and in line with
changes in the economic fundamentals. Conseguentİy, exchange rate stability
will be attained through the improvements in the economic fundamentals, and

the strict implementation of the stabilization program.
35. Iİn the event of an excessive foreign exchange supply that might occur
in the market as a result of a robust balance of payments position and
reverse cuürrency substitution, the Central Bank will conduct foreign
exchange buying avuctions in order to increase the foreign exchange reserves
in compliance with the floating exchange rate regime, and in a way not to
distort the long-term trend and the natural egüilibrium level of the

exchange rate.

36. At this point, it should be emphasized once again that there are many
risks associated with holding short or İong positions under the floating
exchange rate regime. Under the floating exchange rate regime, exchange
rates can display a sudden jump or Tall as a result of external shocks or
economic and political developments that change the expectations
substantially and gülckly, in addition to the reasons stated in the
paragraph 34. Within this framework, financial institutions and corporations
holding short or long foreign exchange positions are exposed to considerable
risks. Such positions can also increase the intensity of the fluctuations that
might occur in the exchange rates as a result of the above- mentioned

reasons.

37. On the other hand, exchange rate in Turkey is still one of the
significant variables determining the prices, although it has İost its speed
and power in influencing the prices, a result of the success in the fight
against inflation and introduction of the floating exchange rate regime.

Thus, the tendency to hold short or İlong position, which increases the
volatility of the exchange rates, may have a negative impact on the policies
towards price stability, in addition to the risks arising from holding such

positions.

38. —The development of forward markets helps decrease volatility in the
exchange rates and the risks generated by such volatility. Within this
framework, the forward transactions market, where forward foreign
exchange contracts are traded, was initiated at the Istanbul Stock
Exchange in August 2001 with the support of the Central Bank. Furthermore,
the preparations for determining the Turkish lira reference interest rate
(TRLIBOR), which will play a significant role in the pricing of Tinancial
instruments including Torward foreign exchange rates, were completed by
the Banks Association of Turkey with the contribution of the Central Bank.
Turkish lira reference interest rates have been announced since August 1,
2002. Although the necessary tax and technical arrangements have been
made, eliminating the obstacles to the developments of the forward foreign
exchange transactions market, this market could not be made operative
efficientiy. Besides financial institutions, also the corporations that are
affected negatively from the volatility in exchange rates should provide
training activities regarding Torward foreign exchange transactions and

cooperate with the financial institutions.
