Number: 2003 - 45 
30 September 2003 
 
THE CBRT PRESS RELEASE 
A) FOREIGN EXCHANGE BUYING AUCTION PROGRAM FOR OCTO BER 
Considering that strong reserve position would boos t the market’s confidence in the 
current program and observing the excess foreign ex change supply, the Central Bank of 
Turkey (CBRT) has been conducting foreign exchange buying auctions since 6 May 2003.  
Through foreign exchange buying auctions, the CBRT bought USD 4,327 billion in 
total in the period between 6 May and 30 September 2003. Moreover, USD 4,229 billion in 
total was bought by means of six outright buying in terventions aiming at preventing excessive 
volatility in exchange rates. Hence, total amount o f USD 8,556 billion was bought through 
foreign exchange buying auctions and foreign exchan ge outright buying interventions in the 
May – September period.  
As it is predicted that the excess foreign exchange  supply observed in the May-
September period should continue also in October, i t has been decided to announce a foreign 
exchange buying auction program for October. Accord ingly, the total amount of daily foreign 
exchange buying auction will be USD 50 million. The refore, the maximum daily auction can 
amount to USD 75 million, together with the optiona l selling of USD 25 million. Foreign 
exchange buying auctions are to be held on 20 worki ng days throughout October, except for 
28 and 29 October during the Turkish Republic Day, and 13 October, which is public holiday 
in USA. It is planned that the maximum amount to be  bought should be USD 1.500 billion. 
As were announced by previous press releases, the C BRT may, with a prior notice, 
suspend the auctions before the end of the period i n the cases where the depth of foreign 
exchange market is lost and excessive volatility is  observed in exchange rates due to an 
external shock or unpredictable developments. In ad dition, the CBRT may make changes in 
the amounts of daily auctions by announcing it in a dvance, due to unexpected significant and 
enduring changes in the excess foreign exchange sup ply.  
As usual, the CBRT will continue to closely monitor  the volatility in exchange rates 
and will directly intervene in the market in case o f an excessive volatility in both directions. 
B) THE TL DEPOSIT BUYING AUCTION PROGRAM FOR OCTOBE R 
 The CBRT will continue to conduct Turkish lira buy ing auctions in October 2003 with 
a standard four-week maturity that was initiated in  April 2002 as a supplement to its existing 
instruments in the Interbank Money Market with the aim of enhancing the effectiveness of its 
efforts to sterilize the excess Turkish lira liquid ity in the system.  
As in September 2003, Turkish lira buying auctions will be held every week on 
Wednesday and Friday in October 2003 too. The maxim um amount to be bought in every 
auction will be TL 100 trillion. 
Moreover, the maturity date for the auction to be m ade on the 1 st  October 2003 will be 
30 October 2003, due to the Turkish Republic Day. 