Number: 2003 -47  
6 October 2003 
 
THE CBRT PRESS RELEASE 
ON THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE BUYING AUCTIONS 
Considering that strong reserve position would boos t the market’s confidence in the 
current program and observing the excess foreign ex change supply, the Central Bank of 
Turkey (CBRT) has been conducting foreign exchange buying auctions since 6 May 2003.  
It was announced by our press release of 30 Septemb er 2003 that the excess foreign 
exchange supply was expected to continue also in Oc tober, and the maximum amount of daily 
foreign exchange auction could amount to USD 75 mil lion, by the utilization of the buying 
auction of USD 50 million, and the optional selling  of USD 25 million. It was also announced 
that the CBRT might, with a prior notice, make chan ges in the amounts of daily auctions due 
to unexpected developments in the excess foreign ex change supply. 
The CBRT has bought USD 271 million in total since the beginning of October by 
conducting 4 foreign exchange buying auctions and o ptional selling after the auctions. 
Accordingly, the daily average amount bought has re ached USD 68 million, and the daily 
average bids have amounted to USD 156 million in Oc tober. Both figures are higher than 
those of September. The CBRT purchased USD 3,463 bi llion in total by means of auctions 
and outright buying throughout September, and it is  expected that the total amount of foreign 
exchange supply in September would continue also in  October along with the recent favorable 
prospects on the Turkish economy. Considering these  developments, the CBRT has increased 
its daily buying auctions to USD 80 million effecti ve from 7 October 2003 for the rest of 
October 2003. Therefore, the maximum amount of dail y foreign exchange buying auction can 
amount to USD 120 million, by the utilization of th e buying auction of USD 80 million and 
the optional selling of USD 40 million. Also in the  next period, the CBRT might, with a prior 
notice, make changes in the amounts of daily auctio ns and/or optional selling due to 
unexpected developments in the excess foreign excha nge supply. 
As was announced by previous press releases, the CB RT may, with a prior notice, 
suspend the auctions before the end of the period i n the cases where the depth of foreign 
exchange market is lost and excessive volatility is  observed in exchange rates due to an 
external shock or unpredictable developments. 
As usual, the CBRT will continue to closely monitor  the volatility in exchange rates 
and will directly intervene in the market in case o f an excessive volatility in both directions. 
 
 