Number: 2003 - 34 
31 July 2003 
 
THE CBRT PRESS RELEASE 
 
A) THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE BUYING AUCTION PROGRAM FOR AUGUST 
Considering that strong reserve position would boos t the market’s confidence in the 
current program and observing the excess foreign ex change supply, the Central Bank of 
Turkey (CBRT) started to hold foreign exchange buyi ng auctions on 6 May 2003.  
Through foreign exchange buying auctions, the CBRT bought USD 1.960 billion in 
total, USD 340 million of which in May, USD 630 mil lion in June, and USD 990 million in 
July. Moreover, the USD 2.083 billion in total was bought by means of outright buying 
interventions made in May (USD 579 million), in Jun e (USD 566 million) and in July (USD 
938 million) upon excessive volatility in exchange rates. Hence, total amount of USD 4.043 
billion was bought by means of foreign exchange buy ing auctions and foreign exchange 
outright buying interventions in May, June and July .  
It is predicted that the excess supply in foreign e xchange market occurred in May-July 
period should continue also in August due to the se asonal factors. Therefore, it has been 
decided to announce a monthly foreign exchange buyi ng auction program for August as well, 
and the total amount of daily foreign exchange buyi ng will be USD 50 million. Accordingly, 
foreign exchange buying auctions are to be held on 21 working days throughout the August, 
and the maximum amount to be bought will be USD 1.0 50 million. 
As usual, the CBRT will continue to closely monitor  the volatility in exchange rates 
and will directly intervene in the market in case o f an excessive volatility in both directions. 
Moreover, as were announced by previous press relea ses, the CBRT may, with a prior notice, 
suspend the auctions before the end of the period i n the cases where the depth of foreign 
exchange market is lost and excessive volatility is  observed in exchange rates due to an 
external shock or unpredictable developments. 
 
B) THE TL DEPOSIT BUYING AUCTION PROGRAM FOR AUGUST  
 The CBRT will continue to conduct Turkish Lira buy ing auctions in August 2003 with 
a standard four-week maturity that was initiated in  April 2002 as a supplement to its existing 
instruments in the Interbank Money Market with the aim of enhancing the effectiveness of its 
efforts to sterilize the excess Turkish lira liquid ity in the system.  
Turkish lira buying auctions will be held every wee k on Wednesday and Friday as 
before, and the maximum amount to be bought in ever y auction will be TL 100 trillion. 
 