Number: 2003 - 28 
30 June 2003 
 
 
THE CBRT PRESS RELEASE 
A) THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE BUYING AUCTION PROGRAM FOR JULY 
Considering that strong reserve position would boos t the market’s confidence in the current 
program and observing the excess foreign exchange s upply, the Central Bank of Turkey (CBRT) 
continued to hold foreign exchange buying auctions in June as well, which was started on 6 May 2003, 
by increasing the daily auction amount to USD 30 mi llion.  
Through foreign exchange buying auctions, the CBRT bought USD 970 million in total, USD 
340 million of which in May and USD 630 million in June. Moreover, the USD 1.145 billion in total 
was bought by means of outright buying intervention s made in May (USD 579 million) and on 9 June 
2003 (USD 566 million) upon excessive volatility in  exchange rates. Hence, total amount of USD 2.115 
billion was bought by means of foreign exchange buy ing auctions and foreign exchange outright buying 
interventions in May and June.  
It is predicted that the excess supply in foreign e xchange market occurred in May and June will 
increasingly continue in July, due to the seasonal factors. Therefore, it has been decided to announce  a 
monthly foreign exchange buying auction program for  July as well, and the total amount of daily foreig n 
exchange buying will be USD 40 million. Accordingly , in July, foreign exchange buying auction will be 
held on 22 working days throughout the month, excep t for 4 July 2003, the public holiday in USA, and 
the maximum amount to be bought will be USD 880 mil lion. 
Besides, as was announced by our press release of 1 3 June 2003, the CBRT has discontinued the 
practice of maximum bid price in foreign exchange b uying auctions as of 16 June 2003, in order to 
ensure that the targeted daily amount of foreign ex change buying is realized. In July too, there will be no 
maximum bid price in foreign exchange buying auctio ns, and all other conditions will stay the same. 
As usual, the CBRT will continue to closely monitor  the volatility in exchange rates and will 
directly intervene in the market in case of an exce ssive volatility in both directions. Moreover, as w ere 
announced by previous press releases, the CBRT may,  with a prior notice, suspend the auctions before 
the end of the period in the cases where the depth of foreign exchange market is lost and excessive 
volatility is observed in exchange rates due to an external shock or unpredictable developments. 
 
B) THE TURKISH LIRA DEPOSIT BUYING AUCTION PROGRAM FOR JULY 
 The CBRT will continue to conduct Turkish Lira buy ing auctions in July 2003 with a standard 
four-week maturity that was initiated in April 2002  as a supplement to its existing instruments in the  
Interbank Money Market with the aim of enhancing th e effectiveness of its efforts to sterilize the exc ess 
Turkish lira liquidity in the system.  
Turkish lira buying auctions will be held every wee k on Wednesday and Friday as in June 2003 
and the maximum amount to be bought in every auctio n will be TL 200 trillion.  
 
 