No: 2003-10 
3 March 2003 
 
CENTRAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY 
PRESS RELEASE 
 
As is known, the Turkish Parliament has rejected th e motion allowing the deployment 
of foreign troops on Turkish soil and sending the T urkish army to a cross-border operation. 
By reducing the likelihood of an impending financia l aid package, this decision may initially 
have some repercussions on exchange rates and inter est rates, creating volatility. 
However, with the current economic program aiming t o restructure the economy and 
to assure a permanent stability, several structural  reforms have been realized, and certain 
stabilization has been achieved in the economy. As a result, the economy has become less 
vulnerable against exogenous shocks.  
The Government has decided to send to the Parliamen t the 2003 Fiscal Year Budget, 
which is prepared in line with the primary surplus of 6,5 percent of GNP. The measures 
envisaged in the Budget, which are destined to incr ease public revenues and to reduce 
government spending, are expected to be instrumenta l in achieving fiscal discipline, and in 
limiting the negative reflections of a possible mil itary operation against Iraq on domestic 
economy in the upcoming period. Moreover, these mea sures show the determination to 
safeguard the fiscal discipline, and thus to carry on with the strengthened current economic 
program in the next period. This is an important st ep towards completing the fourth review of 
Turkey’s ongoing stand-by arrangements with the IMF .  
Maintaining financial stability during this period is of utmost importance and the 
Central Bank will rapidly take all the measures nee ded to ensure efficient operation of the 
markets. Currently, the amount of liquidity in the Turkish lira money markets is adequate to 
meet the liquidity needs of the financial system. H owever, the Central Bank will meet any 
additional liquidity need that might emerge in the markets, by making use of current 
arrangements or by making additional arrangements. 
Meanwhile, important achievements were obtained las t year on the way to price 
stability, which is the primary objective of the Ce ntral Bank. Therefore, it is highly important 
to avoid excessive movements in exchange rates that  may put these achievements at risk. We 
strongly believe that players in the financial syst em will show the common sense needed at 
this sensitive period we are currently undergoing. However, the Central Bank will closely 
monitor excessive volatility that might occur in ex change rates due to liquidity shortage in 
markets, or speculative actions, and will intervene  in excessive volatility that may emerge in 
either way, as it was the case in the past.  