Number:2004- 44 
  
December 20, 2004  
PRESS RELEASE  
ON 
CBRT INTEREST RATES  
  
I. GENERAL ASSESSMENT  
1.       The Central Bank (CBRT) has regularly announced its views pertaining to 
the general macroeconomic outlook and future inflation via press releases 
under the title of “Inflation and Outlook”. In this context, especially in the 
reports and announcements issued in the second half of the year, the CBRT 
outlined its perspective for 2005. The ri sks that have been underlined include: 
(i) domestic demand and labor costs may not help reduce inflation as much as they did in the past three years, (ii) the high increase in raw material costs and 
wholesale prices might start to exert pressure on inflation after some time, (iii) 
uncertainties about the launch date of membership negotiations with the 
European Union may lead to fluctuations in the financial markets, (iv)  
concerns over the sustainability of the current program, (v) price rigidity in 
the ser vices sector, especially in rents, (vi) the likelihood of adverse 
developments in international liquidity conditions. 
2. 
      The studies for creating a new Economic Program to be implemented in the 
next three years are about to be finalized. The main pillar s of the new 
economic program will be fiscal and monetary discipline, and structural reforms. The realization of structural reforms will have a positive impact on 
the quality and sustainability of fiscal discipline. Especially tax and social 
security refor ms are of crucial importance to this end. The policies ensuring 
that the principles of the current economic program, whose success has been proven, would be implemented in 2005 and onwards have, to a large extent, 
removed uncertainties.  
3.        Meanwhile, the EU decision to start membership talks with Turkey, which 
was announced at the EU summit on December 17th, 2004, is believed to 
support the sustainability of reforms within the framework of the program.  
4.       These developments have reduced the above -mentioned risks in terms of 
inflation in the coming period. Moreover, according to recently announced 
data, economic activity lost momentum in the second half of 2004, and the 
declining deferred demand eased the pressure on domestic demand. These 
development s were predicted in the CBRT’s press release on interest rate cuts 
dated 8 September 2004, in subsequent announcements, and in the recent press release of 9 December 2004. Moreover, as recently emphasized; factors 
such as deceleration in the rate of increase in industrial production, imports of 
intermediary goods, money demand and credits, and the drop in excess 
liquidity, along with the stabilization of consumer tendency and consumer 
confidence index, indicate that domestic demand will not reach a level that 
would bring about inflationary pressure, at least in the short run.  
5. 
      All these developments have reinforced our belief that future inflation will 
pursue a course which is consistent with the targets. Undoubtedly, the CBRT 
will continue to closely monitor the risks associated to future inflation as 
usual. 
II. THE CENTRAL BANK INTEREST RATES  
6.       In the light of the evaluations above, the CBRT has decided to cut short -
term interest rates applied at the CBRT Interbank Money Market and at the Istanbul  Stock Exchange Repo -Reverse Repo Market starting from 20 
December 2004 as follows:  
a) 
      Overnight Interest Rates:  The borrowing interest rate is lowered to 
18 percent  from 20 percent and the lending interest rate to 22 percent  
from 24 percent.  b)       Other Maturities:  The one -week borrowing interest rate is lowered 
to 18 percent  from 20 percent.  
c)        Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates:  Within the framework of 
the Late Liquidity Window Facility, the CBRT overnight borrowing 
interest rate applicable between 16:00 –  16:30 hours at Interbank 
Money Market is lowered to 26 percent  from 28 percent. Borrowing 
interest rate of 5 percent remains the same.  
d)       The interest rates on overnight and one -week maturity borrowing 
facilities provided for primary de aler banks via repo transactions 
within the framework of open market transactions are lowered to 20 percent  from 22 percent.     
7. 
      Moreover, in line with the developments in foreign exchange liquidity 
observed in FX markets in May 2004, the interest ra te applicable to one- week -
maturity foreign exchange deposits provided for banks within their borrowing limits at the CBRT Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets, which was cut  
to 6 percent from 10 percent on 11 May 2004, is raised to 10 percent  in the 
light of favorable developments in the foreign exchange liquidity of banks and 
their efficient liquidity management.  
 
 