Number: 2004 - 4
22 January 2004

THE CBRT PRESS RELEASE
ON
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE BUYING AUCTIONS

Considering that strong reserve position would boost the market’s confidence in the
current program and observing the excess foreign exchange supply, the Central Bank of
Turkey (CBRT) conducted daily foreign exchange buying auctions between 6 May and 23
October 2003. However, as announced in the press release of 22 October 2003, the CBRT has
suspended its daily foreign exchange buying auctions given the volatility currently observed
in foreign exchange market arising from the decline in the foreign exchange supply. It was
also announced that, in case there should be an increase in the foreign exchange supply in the
next period, the CBRT might, with a prior notice, resume holding foreign exchange buying
auctions.
The CBRT has recently been observing an increase in the excess foreign exchange
supply, which is attributable to significant economic achievements obtained especially on the
inflation front as a result of the current economic program implemented in 2002 and 2003.
Combined with the favorable expectations for 2004, it is expected that this excess supply
should continue in the next period as well. In this framework, the CBRT has decided to
resume daily foreign exchange buying auctions starting from 23 January 2004.
The daily amount of foreign exchange buying auctions will be USD 30 million for the
remainder of January 2004. Moreover, a selling option based on the average price realized in
the auction will be granted exclusively to those institutions (banks and special finance houses)
that are eligible to sell foreign exchange in that auction. The maximum amount of the optional
selling that an institution can utilize will be 100 percent of what it has sold in that auction.
Therefore, the maximum daily auction can amount to USD 60 million, by the utilization of the
optional selling of USD 30 million. Accordingly, foreign exchange buying auctions are to be
held on 6 working days in the remainder of January and it is planned that the maximum
amount to be bought would be USD 360 million.
As was announced by previous press releases, the CBRT may, with a prior notice,
suspend the auctions before the end of the period in the cases where the depth of foreign
exchange market is lost and excessive volatility is observed in exchange rates due to an
exogenous shock or unpredictable developments. As usual, the CBRT will continue to closely
monitor the volatility in exchange rates and will directly intervene in the market in case of an
excessive volatility in both directions.

