Number: 2004 - 43 20 December 2004

PRESS RELEASE

ON

MONETARY AND EXCHANGE RATE POLICY FOR 2005

Introduction

i.

2.

Just after the 2001 crisis, Central Bank of Turkey announced in its
press release of 22 February 2001 that it was impossible to continue
with the currency-peg regime as the anchor of the stabilization
program that had been initiated at the start of 2000 and had
eventually lost its credibility, it was necessary to switch to the
floating exchange-rate regime, and the Bank would assume the
inflation targeting regime in its monetary policy strategy when the

time was ripe.

The post-crisis monetary policy was focused on the achievement of
price stability, which is the primary objective of the Central Bank
that has become independent by law. When the new program that
was initiated in May 2001 started to yield results in fiscal discipline,
bank rehabilitation, structural reforms and floating exchange rate
regime, the Central Bank announced its monetary policy strategy
with press release of 2 January 2002 titled “Monetary and Exchange
Rate Policy in 2002 and Prospective Developments” and its intention

of adopting the implicit inflation targeting.
3. The main reason of undertaking such a strategy was that the
necessary conditions for a formal inflation-targeting regime were not
in place. The second reason was that İit was difficult to predict the
course of money demand under chronic inflation environment, and
relying exclusively on monetary targeting in the fight against
inflation was inadeguate due to the fact that there seems to be no
stable relationship between monetary indicators and inflation. Both
in the press release of eariy 2002 and in the successive
announcements, the public has been made aware of the
developments on macroeconomic balances and the role of monetary
policy in order to help economic agents to understand the new
regime. So far, many concepts, which the public was unfamiliar
with, have been introduced by means of reports and press releases,
emphasizing on every occasion that inflation is a chronic disease
that must absolutely be overcome. İt has been repeatediy
underlined that price stability is the sine-gua-non pre-condition for a
sustained growth in the medium- and long term; and that even in
the short-term the decline in inflation could spur the economic
growth along with the increased confidence in the current policies,
the tight fiscal policy would not hinder the growth under high public
debt environment, and the floating exchange rate regime could be
sustained in our country, as İs currentiy implemented in

approximately 80 countries all around the world.

4. Today we have reached a turning point where inflation has declined
to single digits after 30 years, and the large section of the public
believes that the ongoing recovery in inflation is not temporary, and

more importantiy, believes that it should not be temporary.
Why “Implicit” Inflation Targeting?

5.

As also discussed earlier in various platforms, the issue of sensitive
public debt dynamics which can be called as “fTiscal dominance” or
“public debt dominance” was the main factor that marked the 20012004 period and limited the efficiency of post-crisis monetary policy.
In economies that have suffered deep credibility crisis and
undergone high debt burden, where maturities are short and most
of the debts is either flexible rate or indexed to foreign currency,
central banks cannot exert full control over the general level of
interest rates by using short-term interest rates as policy
instrument. Therefore, the general level of interest rates and
exchange rates can be extremely sensitive to variocus endogenous
and exogenous shocks in such economies. The volatility of such
variables can damage both the guality of predictability of effects
arising from these shocks and the effectiveness of monetary policy

transmission mechanisms.

After the 2001 crisis, the Central Bank was faced with the similar
restrictions. The Central Bank thought that an early transition to
formal inflation targeting would not be right, which has been worked
on İntensively since 2000 and occasionally shared with business,
financial and academic circles. In fact, the efficiency of inflation
targeting depends largely on the level of credibility. No doubt,
credibility is one of the necessary conditions for the success of any
kind of economic policy. However, credibility becomes even more
important in inflation targeting. The Central Bank, which has
accumulated extensive information on inflation targeting since 2000,
has acted according to the argument that switching to inflation
targeting system when necessary conditions are not in place should

not be viable. In this context, after the introduction of floating
exchange rate regime, a gradual convergence strategy for formal
inflation targeting was adopted, and it was decided to wait for the
removal of elements that constrain the efficiency of monetary policy
and hinder the functioning of transmission mechanisms. In other
words, the Central Bank has adopted a cautious attitude for more
than three years, seeking to provide the support of fiscal discipline,
and to increase the credibility of inflation targets. Moreover, it has
been emphasized that the structural reforms are vital for disinflation
efforts in the medium- and long term, and every structural
adjustment intended for clearing the way for price stability has been

supported.

Wext Step: Formal Inflation Targeting

7. We have been experiencing an extremely important economic
transformation since the 2001 crisis. Structural reforms and related
steps taken for the Central Bank independence, monetary and fiscal
discipline, and floating exchange rates have brought about
undeniable achievements on the way to price stability. In line with
this process, the structural reforms initiated in every sectors of the
economy and determined economic policies have started to change
swiftly the behaviors of economic agents both in the public and
private sectors. Concerns over the sustainability of public debt stock
have lost their importance among the economic issues. More
significantly, perceptions that the current approach would be
sustained with a medium-term perspective by embracing and
deepening the structural reforms has been reinforced along with the
introduction of a medium-term program that should even be a

natural pre-condition for a gradual transition to formal inflation
8.

targeting. Iİn this process, the credit transmission mechanism has
started to function more effectively. All these developments are
signaling the gradual formation of a proper environment in terms of

inflation targeting.

The Central Bank will gradually move on to formal inflation targeting
strategy that would enhance the credibility of price stability
objective even further, which is the sine-gua-non condition of
macroeconomic stability. The aim of gradual transition to inflation
targeting is t0o make monetary policy decisions more predictable and
transparent, which constitute an integral part of the inflationtargeting regime. Undoubtediy, being cautious and taking steps
within the framework of a plan are crucial for not losing the
flexibility that will be necessary in making monetary policy decisions.
When considering the achievements obtained so far and the everincreasing efficiency of monetary policy implementations, taking
some steps about the decision-making process of monetary policy
and sharing these steps with the public will very much contribute to

the economic stability that has already started.

Monetary Policy Decision-Making Process in the Coming Period

9.

In the coming period, the initial change on monetary policy decisionmaking mechanism will be focused on making the timing and
direction of iİinterest-rate decisions more transparent and
predictable. Besides, in line with enhancing the principles of
transparency and accountability, it is expected that more

information related to other elements of decision-making process
would be shared. Also at the beginning of 2006, formal inflation

targeting will be launched.

10. The monetary policy strategy implemented during the recent years

l11.

12.

has been gradually converging to the inflation targeting. In the
forthcoming period, the monetary policy actions will be even closer
to the definition of formal inflation targeting. Accordingiy, the
inflation targeting system to be launched in the beginning of 2006
should be classified as a further step to be taken on the road to
institutionalizing monetary policy decision-making mechanism and
attaining price stability, rather than a new regime. İt should be
perceived as a natural outcome of the “normalization” process of

our economy.

Currently the Central Bank's main policy instrument is the shortterm interest rates in Interbank Money Market within CBRT, and
Istanbul Stock Exchange Repurchase and Reverse Repurchase
Market. Short-term interest rates can be changed on any business
day. Whenever a change occurs, the new rates and the rationale
behind the interest-rate decisions are announced. At interval periods
when interest rates remain unchanged, there is no announcement

regarding the interest rates.

In the next period, the general framework of monetary policy,
decision-making process and timing, and the structure of these
mechanisms when formal inflation targeting is launched will be as

follows:

Starting from January 2005, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC)
will meet regulariy under the chairmanship of the Governor on the

8© of each month, at 15:00hrs to discuss the developments in
ili)

inflation and economy. Should the 8 of a certain month happen to
fall on a holiday, than the committee will meet at the same time on

the following business day.

During the ordinary meetings, inflation trends and developments in
domestic-international markets will be evaluated. Related
departments will present their reports to the MPC and will open their
analyses and views to discussion. The Undersecretariat of Treasury
will provide a summary of the latest developments on fiscal policy

and borrowing strategy.

Decisions on interest rates will be announced taking into account
the evaluations of the MPC meeting on the following business day at
09:00hrs. During the one-month period between the two decisions
short-term interest rates will remain unchanged unless an
extraordinary development occurs. Whatever the decision is, (even
if the interest rates are not to be changed) an announcement on the
rationale behind changing/not changing interests rates, including
the Central Bank's evaluations on the general outlook of the
economy will be made within two days. The announcement will also

incorporate the monthly press release of “Inflation and Outlook.”

iv) The Central Bank will start the formal inflation targeting system in

the beginning of 2006. As stated above, in the transition period MPC
will be in an advisory position while making the final interest rates
decisions. When the inflation targeting is launched officially in 2006,
interest rate decisions will be subject to the approval of MPC and a
summary of the meeting will be published. Moreover, in the Inflation
Report that will replace the current guarterly Monetary Policy Report

inflation forecasts will be announced duantitatively. Thus,
transparency in monetary policy applications will be attained to a

great extent.

v) The overall operational framework of formal inflation targeting and
details of the decision-making mechanism will be explained at a

later stage.

vi) In 2005, which is the transition period, Monetary Base and Net
International Reserves will continue to be monitored as performance

criteria; Net Domestic Assets will be monitored as indicative target.

vii) The main objective of the Central Bank, as stipulated in the Bank's
Law, is the price stability. For this reason, and as reiterated by the
Central Bank on every occasion since 2001, short-term interest rate
decisions are taken by evaluating the inflation outlook and the
inflation target. Entitled by its law to collect all kinds of information,
the Central Bank will continue analyzing all economic indicators in
terms of their influence on the inflation outlook. Therefore, it will be
crucial from now on that the monthliy press releases of the Bank on
“Inflation and Outlook” and Monetary Policy reports should be well

read and understood, as before.

Exchange Rate Policy and Foreign Exchange Buying Auctions

13.The economic transformation process as explained in its general
framework above has produced undeniable achievements on the
way to macroeconomic stability. As a natural conseguence of this
process, unstable macroeconomic policies of the past and the
“dollarization” effect caused by high inflation started to İose

importance. Economic agents have been increasingiy holding more
14.

15.

Turkish lira-denominated financial assets in their portfolios since
2002. Although there have been some deviations from this main
trend due to exogenous shocks, İit is obvious that the current
program has initiated the “reverse dollarization” process, which is

one oOf the favorable outcomes.

Three years ago in its “Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy and
Prospective Developments in 2002” announcement dated 2 January
2002, the Central Bank informed the public that the developments
would take the above-mentioned course as İong as the economic
program was implemented uninterruptediy. As emphasized in the
said announcement and in those made in the subseguent New
Years, an important conseguence of the reverse dollarization
process is that, taken along with the favorable developments in
balance of payments, it progressively pushes up the level of foreign
exchange supply in the economy while not increasing foreign

exchange demand at the same amount or even reducing İt.

In countries where floating exchange rate regime is implemented, it
is naturally expected that the level of foreign currency reserves
should not bear much significance since the level of exchange rate is
determined according to supply and demand conditions in the
market — in other words, since central banks do not intervene the
market. However, some central banks have to carry out the external
debt service of the public sector. In such countries including Turkey,
level of foreign currency reserves becomes important even if the
floating exchange rate regime is in effect. Moreover, considering the
need to reduce gradualliy in the long-term the costly Foreign
Exchange Deposit Accounts with Credit Letters, which are peculiar
to OuUr country and occupy a crucial position on the İiabilities side of

the Central Bank balance sheet, the level of foreign currency
reserves becomes even more important. The Central Bank has been
pursuing an interest rate policy for these accounts in line with this
necessity since 2002. However, it is natural that this does not bear
as much importance as it does in fixed or predictable exchange-rate
regimes, since there is no such an exchange rate that should be

preserved.

16. Therefore, foreign exchange buying auctions were held when

17.

foreign exchange supply increased more than foreign exchange
demand, considering that the robust foreign currency reserve
position could contribute to the enhancement of the confidence in
the current program. İn this framework, foreign exchange buying
auctions were commenced on İ April 2002, and carried on in 2003
and 2004 as long as the conditions were available. In other words,
the Central Bank followed a moderate reserve-raising strategy, not
in all circumstances, but only when the discrepancy between foreign
exchange supply and demand grew significantly in favor of the first

one.

Here, the main principle is that the exchange rate is determined by
supply and demand conditions, and the Central Bank does not have
any exchange rate target under the current floating exchange rate
regime. Undoubtediy, foreign exchange buying auctions exert
influyence on foreign exchange demand. However, the purpose of
foreign exchange buying auctions is not to affect the supply and
demand conditions structuraliy, but to increase the foreign currency
reserves moderately in line with the reasons mentioned above or
avoid a decline in these reserves in cases of gradual rise in supply.
For this reason, foreign exchange buying operations are carried out
through auctions whose terms are announced in advance. The

intention here is to keep the impact on supply and demand
18.

19.

conditions in the markets at a minimum level and to stick to the
main principles and functioning of the floating exchange rate regime

which has brought immeasurable benefits in recent years.

Studies for a new Economic Program to be implemented in the
upcoming three-year period are about to be finalized. Fiscal and
monetary discipline and structural reforms constitute the core of the
new program as before. Structural reforms to be performed will
have a favorable effect on the guality and sustainability of fiscal
discipline as well. Meanwhile, the decision taken in the European
Union summit on İ7 December 2004 to start the accession talks
with Turkey for full membership of the EU is expected to help
sustain the structural reforms to be performed in the framework of

the program.

In the absence of serious exogenous shocks, reverse dollarization
process is expected to become more evident and capital inflows to
increase under the new three-year program, which foresees
sustaining of the fiscal and monetary discipline, deepening of
structural reforms, and enhancing of the guality of fiscal discipline.
Meanwhile, it is clear that favorable developments in the negotiation
process for full membership to the European Union will positively
affect both the reverse currency substitution process and also the
balance of payments. In other words, the next three-year period will
witness an increase in foreign exchange supply compared to foreign
exchange demand. Iİn light of these evaluations, the Central Bank of
Turkey (CBRT) will resume holding daily foreign exchange buying
auctions effective from 22 December 2004. The basic principle
stated in the seventeenth paragraph above will also be valid from
now on: İn accordance with the said principle, it is decided to take a

step forward and announce a yearly program to bring the effects of
20.

FX buying auctions on the foreign exchange market to a minimum
and not to resort to any changes in the program unless
extraordinary changes are observed in terms of foreign exchange
liguidity. This will also help prevent the misperceptions on the
exchange rate policy of the CBRT, which are believed to have
caused by the efforts in the previous periods trying to adjust the
amount of foreign exchange buying auctions with the changing
foreign exchange supply, and by the resulting necessary alterations
made in the auction amounts from time to time before the end of

the announced period.
Guidelines for foreign exchange buying auctions are stated below:

The total daily amount of auctions is determined as USD 15 million
for 2005 and the rest of 2004.

Auctions will not be held on the public holidays in the United States,
even İf it is a business day in Turkey. Neither will auctions be held

on half business days.

The additional optional selling amount priced over the average price
realized in the auction will be granted only to the winner institutions
(the banks and special finance houses). The optional amount wili
be 200 percent of the total amount sold in the auction by the
institution. By setting a high optional amount, the CBRT aims to
absorb the excess supply without changing the amount of the
auction. Accordingiy, the maximum daily amount that can be bought
eguals to USD 45 million, with USD 15 million of auction amount and

USD 30 million of optional selling amount.

. The auction number will be posted on the Reuters page CBTO at

i.30 p.m. and the institutions may bid between 1.30 - 2.00 p.m.
Vİ.

Vİİ.

Vİİİ.

21.

After the auction results are posted on the CBTO page of Reuters,
the institutions may use their right to sell optional amount till 2.30

p.m.

The other rules for the foreign exchange buying auctions are not

changed and will be applied as before.

On the other hand, CBRT may, with a prior notice, suspend the
auctions temporarily in the cases where the depth of the foreign
exchange market is lost and thus excessive volatility in exchange
rates, as well as unhealthy price setting are observed due to a

serious exogenous shock or unforeseen extraordinary developments.

Furthermore, the CBRT will continue to closely monitor the volatility
in exchange rates as usual and will directly intervene in the markets
in the event of an excessive volatility that might occur in either
direction. It is crucial to understand that volatility interventions are
not carried out by only considering past data with a mechanical rule.
On the contrary, the CBRT takes volatility intervention decisions

after evaluating the causes of volatility with all aspects.

In conclusion, as has been made clear by the CBRT for a long time
with presentations, announcements and reports, exchange rates will
continue to be determined by supply and demand conditions in the
currency markets. Naturalliy, the key determinants of foreign
exchange supply and demand are economic fundamentals and
expectations. Current account balance and the expected course of
capital movements, as well as the current stability program, are
crucial not only for the establishment of economic fundamentals but

also for the management of expectations.
Liguidity Management

22. Another significant change to be observed in 2005 will be in the

23.

liguidity conditions of TL in the markets. Following the February
2001 crisis, the Central Bank purchased government securities worth
TL 14 guadrillion from state-owned banks and the banks transferred
to Savings Deposit Insurance Fund (SDIF) in order to meet their
liguidity needs. The intensive purchase of foreign exchange in 2003
and 2004 and the purchase mentioned above in turn have created a
substantial amount of excess İiguidity in the market since 2001. The
Central Bank sterilized the excess İliguidity in the market in an active
manner, by means of the Turkish lira deposit operations in the
Interbank Money Market and of the reverse repo transactions
carried out within the framework of the open market operations in
the Repo and Reverse Repo Market of the Istanbul Stock Exchange
Market. Accordingiy, overnight interest rates constantly realize at
the borrowing interest rates of the Central Bank. Within this
framework, borrowing interest rate of the Central Bank has become

an indicator for money markets.

However, excess İiguidity in the market has been shrinking since the
second half of 2004, due to the reimbursements made by the
Treasury to the Central Bank and the rise in monetary base.
Furthermore, net foreign currency debt reimbursement by the
Treasury provided an impetus to this decline. Thus, the excess
liguidity, which was TL 8.8 guadrillion at the beginning of 2004,

decreased and became TL İ.4 guadırillion as of 17 December 2004.

24. In general;

i) The rise in monetary base,
il) Coupon and principal redemption by the Treasury to the
Central Bank,

ili) The increase in Treasury accounts, and

İv) Net foreign currency debt (both domestic and external)

reimbursement by the Treasury via borrowing TL

will have a decreasing effect on the liguidity in the market until the end
of 2004 and throughout 2005, while

i) Purchasing of foreign currency by the Central Bank,
il) Interests payments by the Central Bank for reserve

reguirements

will be the increasing components of excess İiguidity.

2b5.Today, net foreign currency debt reimbursement by the Treasury

26.

and the amount of foreign currency to be purchased by the Central
Bank cannot be predicted by now. Any changes in these factors may
have a major effect on the liguidity in the market. However, despite
all these uncertainties, under the main scenario made by the Central
Bank, the liguidity will continue to decrease gradually and liguidity

shortage is expected in the first guarter of 2005.

With the transition from excess İiguidity to liguidity shortage in the
market, the effectiveness of the monetary policy will increase and
liguidity management strategy will be revised according to the new
environment. The Central Bank sees the stability and development
of financial markets as a supporting objective for the effective
implementation of the policies regarding price stability. Thus, the
Central Bank has taken many measures (as was the case after the
explosions occurred in Istanbul in November 2003) in the last four
years in order to maintain financial stability within the framework of

the floating exchange rate regime. Hence, The Central Bank whose
27.

legal task is to achieve price stability will continue to conduct its
liguidity policy focusing on price stability in 2005 as in the previous
years, and with its liguidity management strategy, it will contribute
to the development and stability of financial markets under new
liguidity conditions. With this aim, it is deemed appropriate to
announce the liguidity management strategy to be adopted by the
Central Bank to the markets by now in the event of a lİiguidity

shortage in order to increase predictability.

In case of negative liguidity in the market, the liguidity management

strategy of the Central Bank will be as follows:

i) In cases when lİliguidity shortage in the market increases, the
Central Bank will cease its transactions at the Istanbul Stock
Exchange Repo-Reverse Repo Market with a pre-announcement
and conduct its İiguidity management operations in its markets
like the other central banks. Considering the İiguidity
management strategy mentioned below, a halt in the
transactions of the Central Bank in the Repo-Reverse Repo
Market is not expected to cause a significant fluctuation in the

said market interest rates.

ii) The Central Bank will continue to announce overnight borrowing
and lending interest rates in the Interbank Money Market
between 10:00-12:00 a.m. and 01:00-04:00 p.m. In case of a
liguidity shortage during the day, banks may borrow from the
Central Bank over its lending rate within their existing limits. If
interest rates decrease due to a rise in liguidity, banks may
transfer TL to the Central Bank without any limits over its

borrowing rates. The 4-point gap between borrowing and
lending interest rates is planned to be 3 points in the upcoming

period.

ili) The Central Bank will continue to provide the “Late Liguidity
Window Facility” between 16:00-16:30 hrs and the banks will be
able to borrow unlimitediy from “Late Liguidity Window” against
collateral or lend money to the Central Bank. It is planned that
the difference between the intraday lending rate and the
Central Bank's lending rate within the framework of late liguidity
window facility, which is currently 4 points, shall remain
unchanged and the difference between the intraday borrowing
rate and the Central Bank's borrowing rate, which is currentliy

15 points, is planned to be fixed at approximately 5 points.

iv) The Central Bank will continue to provide the primary dealer
banks with liguidity facilities in 2005 as well. The interest rate
applicable to the overnight and one-week-maturity repo facility
provided for the primary banks, which is currently 2 percentage
points below the lending interest rate at the Interbank Money
Market, is planned to be İ percentage points lower than the
latter. The primary dealer banks will be able to benefit from the
repo facility between 10:00-12:00 a.m. and 13:00-16:00 p.m.

v) The Central Bank will start to manage İiguidity via repo auctions
with one-week maturity. To this aim, during the times of
liguidity shortage, the CBRT will announce the repo auction
amount on CBİF page on the Reuters system at 10:00 a.m. and
it will aim to hold the average auction rate around İ percentage
point above the Central Bank borrowing rate at the Interbank

Money Market.
vi) The repo auctions with one-week maturity will be held at 11:00
a.m. and the results will be announced on the CBİG page on
the Reuters system by 11:30 am the latest. Traditional auction
method will be employed in the auctions, which means the

preferred bids will be evaluated with their own interest rates.

vil) In case an excessive decline in liguidity emerges due to some
unforeseen reasons by exerting too much pressure on İnterest
rates in the money market, the Central Bank might, if it deems
necessary, hold an “İntraday Repo Auction” in addition to the

regular repo auction held at 11:00 a.m.

28.As is known, with the aim of contributing to the process of

29.

decreasing the costs of the financial system, the Central Bank has
been remunerating for the reguired reserves since 2001. The
reguired reserve implementation will undergo some changes in the
upcoming period as well. Currentiy, the institutions are allowed to
keep at most 3 percent of their TL-denominated reguired reserves
of 6 percent for two weeks on average and they are obliged to keep
at least 3 percent at their blocked accounts. İn order to help banks
to conduct a flexible and effective liguidity management in the case
oOf a liguidity sgueeze, it is planned to calculate the banks' reduired
reserve amount by taking the two-week averages of their free

deposit accounts.

Meanwhile, with the aim of enhancing the effectiveness of the
Central Bank's monetary policy and liguidiiy management, some
changes may be made in the liguidity management strategy as well
as in the above-mentioned interest rates according to the changes

in market conditions and to the needs that may arise in the future.
30.

31.

Currently, liguidity is not spread evenly within the banking system.
In the case of a decline in liguidity or liguidity shortage in the
market, the allocation of liguidity among the banks will become
more important and the depth of secondary market operations will
be crucial to ensure the effective operation of money markets. İn
this process, it would be wise for the banking system to take the
necessary measures to ensure İiguidity flow by also considering risk
principles. It should be borne in mind that Turkish lira liguidity policy
can be implemented more easily under floating exchange rate
regime than it can be under fixed/currency peg regime, in other
words, the Central Bank is in a position to meet the Turkish İira
liguidity needs of the banking system more flexibly and promptly.
However, it is obvious that in this case the banking system is bound
to handle liguidity management by strictly adhering to the risk

management principles.

In the case of a liguidity shortage in the banking system, the
benchmark short-term interest rates will be Central Bank's lending
rates, not the borrowing rates. Therefore, once a İiguidity shortage
arises, the benchmark interest rates will only increase due to
technical reasons. In order to avoid prospective shortcomings, the
Central Bank might revise the interest rates at a time when excess
liguidity moves from positive to negative. To re-emphasize, such a
change in interest rates will be solely based on technical reasons
about the liguidity management, and thus, will have nothing to do

with loosening or tightening of the monetary policy.
