Number: 2004 - 2 2 January 2004

PRESS RELEASE

GENERAL FRAMEWORK OF

MONETARY AND EXCHANGE RATE POLİCY IN 2004

I. MONETARY POLICY
General Evaluation

In 2002 and 2003 significant achievements were obtained on the way to the
economic stability, especially on the inflation front. The primary objective of the
Central Bank of Turkey is to promote these achievements even fTurther, and to
attain permanent price stability in the medium-term. İn the coming period, the
Central Bank will continue to set monetary policies in line with these objectives,
and the consistency of the future course of inflation with the targets will be

taken as the basic criterion.

. Öne of the outstanding characteristics of the process experienced in 2002 and
2003 was that high growth rates were attained along with the declining inflation.
When this process is more closely analyzed, it is observed that the growth
dynamics have come mainly from private sector and become permanent as
specified in the program. İn other words, determined actions against inflation,
tight monetary and fiscal policies, and the developments led by this process have

paved the way for a private sector-based growth.

. Another striking point is that thanks to the achievement of inflation targets set
for 2002 and 2003, the guality of inflation target as a reliable nominal anchor

has improved for 2004 and İlater. İn other words, the inflation target is
becoming a significant reference aggregate for economic agents, which they can
üse in eliminating future uncertainties while making their investment and

consumption decisions. This, in turn, will reinforce the real economy.

A monetary authority, focused onlİy on inflation in monetary policy decisions, will
improve its credentials by giving explicit and understandable signals, thus
increasing the chance of success of disinflation efforts. The results achieved in
Turkey in the last two years have demonstrated the efficiency of this approach.
Moreover, the most apparent common aspect of the central banks, which have
achieved permanent price stability, is their independence and policies involving

explicit signals and systematic behaviors.

Another common aspect of the countries that have succeeded to achieve price
stability is that their public sector debt dynamics are İaid on a solid base, which
is not vulnerable. Hence, risk premium does not display high volatility and the
relationship between short-term interest rates, the key policy tool of central
banks, and İong-term interest rates becomes more evident. This enhances the
efficiency of the instruments used by an independent and inflation-focused
central bank for attaining its targets. Moreover, in countries with chronic and
high inflation, the steps taken towards establishing a solid base for public
balances have a favorable effect on expectations, thus decreasing inertia and

supporting the downward process in inflation.

. Ih an economy where the vulnerability against external shocks is low, the targets
committed by the central banks may become more reliable. If this reliability
reflects on the decisions of the economic agents for the future, the costs of
fight against inflation will diminish. In this context, sustaining the achievements
that have been attained in Turkey in recent years in laying the debt dynamics on
a solid base will eliminate the major factor that leads to uncertainty and thus
will pave the way for permanent price stability.

7. It has been emphasized for years that price stability is merely a tool, and that
the ultimate objective of economic policies is to raise the social welfare
standard. It has also been underlined that this will onliy be achieved by a rapid
and sust ainable growth, and price stability is a “must” in order to achieve this
objective. The 2002-2003 period will always be remembered as the period
during which this opinion has been widely accepted, and the inflation has
received the most serious blow in the last 25 years. The consistency of budget
and incomes policy with the targeted inflation is a prereguisite for the
maintenance of this trend in 2004.

8. The point attained in the fight against inflation can be evaluated as a story of
success in Turkey's last 25-year past. However, Turkey has still a long way to go
in order to achieve price stability by all means. Price stability can be interpreted
as a İevel of inflation risk that can be neglected in the decision-making process
of economic agents. İn this framework, it should not be overlooked that the
point we have reached is still far from price stability. Furthermore, countries,
where inflation displays substantial drops in a short time, usually undergo a mood
of earİy triumph when the inflation rate declines to single digits. And then comes
relaxation. The Central Bank will keep on making every effort to prevent such
thing from happening in Turkey.

9. The sustainability of fiscal discipline and structural reforms, whose importance
has been constantİy underlined, will continue to stand as a significant factor in
the forthcoming period. The economic transformation initiated by the 2001
program should be carried on by social and institutional transformations.
ParticularIİy the steps towards increasing the productivity in public sector are of
great importance with respect to its contribution to the guality of Tfiscal
discipline. Besides, further measures for the development of competitiveness

atmosphere, deepening of financial system by sustaining the banking reforms,
enhancement of investment environment for domestic and foreign investors and
the improvement of good governance will help in overcoming the obstacles on the
way to sustainable growth and price stability.

Inflation and Monefary Policy Implementations in 2003

In 2003, the Central Bank continued to set short-term interest rates, its
primary policy instrument, by analyzing likely future movements of variables that
affect inflation within the framework of various scenarios. İn the first guarter
of 2003, when the inflation was in an upward trend, it was emphasized that this
had stemmed from the external and temporary factors and was foreseen that
the inflation would re-enter in downward trend with the end of the
“extraordinar y” period. This prospect was announced to public as well. Hence, t he
developments following the first guarter of 2003 confirmed these prospects.
The Central Bank's optimistic outlook reinforced the recovery in expectations. In
this context, under the assumption that the economic program would be strictİy
implemented under a İong-term perspective with the elimination of external
uncertainties to a great extent, and that there would be no deviation from fiscal
discipline and structural reforms, short-term interest rates were cut six times
during April-October period. Accordinoly, overnight borrowing interest rate,
which was 44 percent in April, declined to 26 percent.

At this point we should underline the fact that if the current monetary policy is
pursued consistentİy with the targeted inflation, the volatility created by
external shocks will be temporary. Hence, CPI inflation that exceeded the path
consistent with the year-end inflation resulting from the volatilities that
emerged in the markets due to external shocks and costs, which rose
accordingİy, reached 19.3 percent by the end of November, rapidiy coming so

close to the 20 percent target, thanks to the elimination of the aforementioned
unfavorable developments as well as monetary and fiscal policies consistent with
the target.

The decline in inflation in June-December period stemmed from a number of
factors. These factors were the relative stability achieved in the markets, the
appreciation of Turkish lira against foreign currencies, the recovery in cost
conditions due to the increases in the productivity and the moderate real wages,
the slowdown in food and agriculture prices, the pricing and incomes policies in
public sector that were highly consistent with the inflation target, sluggish
domestic demand pressure, the improving competitiveness atmosphere and the

changes observed in investor and consumer sentiment.

Al| these developments, which did not only lay the groundwork for the
aforementioned conditions but also supported the disinflation process, resulted
from the implementation of monetary and fiscal policies compatible with the
economic program. The effects of the budget discipline, and the inflationoriented and independent monetary policy on the economic stability have
manifested themselves in various ways: Firstİy, implementation of an incomes and
budget policy consistent with the targets became the most evident signal of
seriousness in disinflation efforts. Thanks to such an attitude, even in periods
marked by a rapid rise in inflation, inflation prospects for the next twelve
months continued their downward trend. Secondİy, monetary policy and fiscal
policies implemented in line with the program targets contributed to the
restoration of atmosphere of confidence, and decreased risk premium by
eliminating doubts on debt sustainability. These developments have contributed
to the decline in long-tem interest rates, strengthened Turkish Lira, and
therefore, supported disinflation efforts on the cost side. Lastİy, fiscal and
monetary discipline has provided a limited revival in domestic demand, and helped
to avoid a pressure on inflation on the demand side.
Conseguentİy, 2002 and 2003 were the years when it became evident that there
was no magical formula for reducing inflation, but implementation of a credible
economic program coupled with monetary and fiscal policies compatible with the

program targets could render significant achievements in the İong run.

Moneftary Policy in 2004 and the Risks

The Central Bank will continue with implicit inflation targeting under floating
exchange rate regime in 2004 as well. Within this framework, the monetary
aggregates would be monitored, however, the first place would be given to
attaining targeted inflation rate. İn other words, as was reiterated in the
Central Bank reports and presentations before, considering the difficulty in
predicting the Mmoney demand during disinflation process, developments
pertaining to base money would not be considered as a final target but they
would rather be evaluated from the point of the information they provide for

the future inflation targets.

The end-year inflation target for 2004 has been set as 12 percent. On the eve
of 2004, the gap between the expected inflation rate and the targeted rate
came down to 1.9 percentage points. This figure was 15.1 percent for 2002, and
47 percent for 2003. These figures show that in 2004 the confidence that the
downward trend would continue as planned is getting established. This
confidence would undoubtedİy make a positive impact on the wages, prices, rents

and interest rates in the contracts to be signed in the near future.

Certainiy, macroeconomic stability and price stability are not isolated from
political and institutional stability. Therefore, sustainable price stability reguires
structural reforms. Accordingİy, the Central Bank will not only do whatever it

takes to further the achievements attained in the last two years, but also issue
all necessary warnings about the obstacles that might risk attaining price

stability.

18. Within this framework, any steps towards enhancing the effectiveness of
monetary policy will contribute to achieving and maintaining price stability. In
particular, the continuation with the reforms intended fTor increasing
productivity in public sector and for enhancing the guality of primary surplus will
create a positive atmosphere, and calm down fluctuations in risk premium, and
this will, in turn, enhance the effectiveness of the short-term interest rates
used by the Central Bank as the main policy instrument in disinflation efforts.
Actually, it is observed that the Central Bank's power to influence expect at ions
and İonger-term interest rates will increase in periods marked by favorable
developments in macroeconomic and political environment. Therefore, any
efforts and steps that could help economic agents to have a greater perspective

will contribute to the sustained disinflation efforts.

19. The second important part of the structural reforms from the viewpoint of
monetary policy is the deepening of the finance sector reforms. Thus, the
Central Bank's influence on inflation through its main policy instrument, and the
predictability of this mechanism will be reinforced. Undoubtedİy, it is not
possible to eliminate all of the uncertainties of the monetary policy transmission
mechanism in an ever-changing world. However, strengthening of the public debt
dynamic and enhancing the operation of financial system will exert a positive
impact on the transmission mechanism, and this can only be achieved through

carrying out the necessary structural reforms.

20. Although inflation has been significantly reduced, and expectations have been
restored, there are still certain risks for inflation in the years ahead. Despite
the remarkable decline in the ratio of public debt to national product, the debt

dynamics are not yet at a desired İevel. Such a structure might make a negative
21.

impact on the inflation expectations in the event that the economic instability
persists for a İong time, or there is a likelihood of a deviation from the program

targets.

The local elections to be held in March 2003 bear some risks by raising certain
doubts about the recurrence of past populist policies. The only way to drive off
such doubts is to continue to keep the wage and incomes policies in line with the
program. Any negative signal pertaining to this issue can exert a negative impact
on expectations about inflation and current account deficit and general
macroeconomic balance. Moreover, wages and incomes policy that is not
harmonized with macroeconomic targets, even if measures intended for
compensating these effects are taken, would increase uncertainty and risk
perception, and thus lİead to deterioration in expectations and unfavorable

conseguences about inflation.

22. Meanwhile, the prospective course of food and agricultural prices can always be

accepted as a risk element for inflation. The downward trend in the rate of
increase in the prices of these groups contributed to the decline in inflation in
the 2"" and 3"" guarters of 2003. The likelihood that this downward trend might
not continue in 2004 due to supply-induced shocks remains as a risk factor for
inflation. Meanwhile, despite improvements in expectations on the way to
öovercome inertia in inflation, it is observed that backward-looking pricing
behavior has not been entirely abandoned. At this point, it is of utmost
importance that economic agents make price decisions in compliance with the

targeted inflation rate.

23.In economies where fixed exchange rate regime has been abandoned in favor of

floating exchange rate regime, it has been observed that under inflation-focused
credible policies, the relationship between the exchange rate and inflation starts

weakening. Likewise, although floating exchange rate regime does not have a İong
history in Turkey, the preliminary studies indicate that the coefficient of the
exchange rate pass-through has already started to decline. However, exchange
rates still hold good as one of the most important determinants among inflation
dynamics. Thus, the course to be followed by the exchange rates will continue to
be an important factor for 2004 inflation as well. If the fiscal and monetary
policies compatible with the economic program are implemented in 2004 and the
structural reforms are sustained, we do not expect any development that might
jeopardize the inflation target. However, exchange rate volatility may still
remain as a risk factor unless structural reforms reguired to enhancing the

guality of public finances discipline in the medium and İong run are carried out.

IT. LIĞUIDITY MANAGEMENT AND EXCHANGE RATE POLICY

General Assessment

24.The Central Bank deems stability and developments in finance markets as a
supportive goal for an effective implementation of policies pertaining to price
stability. Therefore, the Central Bank, whose primary objective is to achieve and
maintain price stability, will continue to conduct İiguidity policy in line with the
final goal of price stability and to make all necessary contributions to the

stability and development of finance markets.

25. It is now generally accepted that the floating exchange rate regime has had a
significant role in establishing a more stable economy and decreasing
vulnerability to internal and external shocks. Floating exchange rate regime,
which was considered as a “won't work for us” regime —although implemented in
approximately 82 countries in 2001, seems now to be established. Meanwhile, it
has become clear that exchange rate, which is a policy instrument in currency
peg regime, and therefore a “cause”, results from the economic fundamentals,

the current stability program and expectations, but especially from the balance
of payments expectations. At this point, it will be beneficial to clarify once again
the two points regarding the Central Bank's exchange rate policy, which is

sometimes debated in the public.

26. The first point is related to the volatility interventions. It is not relevant to try
to measure excessive volatility in exchange rates through a mechanical way. For
instance, just İooking over the recent volatility data would not be a healthy
approach to estimating the central banks' intervention timing, since the central
banks have to consider the prospective impacts of their steps in the future.
Within this framework, such considerations as “İf the Central Bank had been
sincere inthe volatility criteria,than it should have int ervened by now”, or “Last
intervention did not take place due to volatility, the Central Bank intervened just
by looking at the level” would be inaccurate and unjust, so long as these
considerations depended on the past volatility data onliy. While making
intervention decisions, the Central Bank does not only take into account the
magnitude of current or past volatility, but also try to foresee the future
magnitudes of volatility under conditions where intervention has taken place or

not.

27.The second point is related to Toreign exchange purchasing auctions.
Theoretically, in a genuine floating exchange rate regime, the foreign exchange
reserve level is not supposed to be significant. Departing from this assumption,
the Central Bank's efforts to implement floating exchange rate regime and at
the same time to increase reserves through foreign exchange purchasing
auctions might seem contradictory at first glance. However, there is no
contradiction. Especially in developing economies, a strong Toreign exchange
reserve position contributes to overcoming the negative impacts of internal and
external shocks, realizing external debt service systematically and increasing
confidence of international financial markets in the country. The geographical

position of Turkey, its external debt service and the foreign exchange deposits
28.

held at the Central Bank, which carries an obligation to the workers residing
abroad, make the foreign reserves even more significant, even if under the
floating exchange rate regime. Of course this significance is not as much as it is

in the fixed exchange rate regime or currency peg regime.

Another point to be considered regarding the Toreign exchange purchasing
auctions is the foreign exchange denominated assets of the economic agents
accumulated over the years due to past instabilities. Dollarization, is expected
to İlose ground over time due to drastic changes in the corrupt economic
structure, which is actually the main reason of dollarization. This process is
actually called the “reverse currency substitution” and at this point, the
difference between the “reverse stock dollarization” and the “reverse flow
dollarization” should be identified. Generally, at the outset of a reverse
currency substitution process, or may be Tor a certain period, reverse Tlow
dollarization is expected to dominate. İn other words, even though there is no
decline in the FX-denominated financial assets held in the portfolios of economic
units, the real value of these assets, for instance the ratio of FX-denominated
financial assets to national income might decrease in time and come down to a
marginal level. If just the opposite is noticed for the national currency
denominated financial assets during the same period, then it can be asserted
that a reverse flow dollarization is taking place. This also means that relative
foreign exchange demand is decreasing. Meanwhile, dissolving FX- denominated
financial asset stocks would mean an increase in relative foreign currency suppİy
as well as a decrease in foreign currency demand. In both cases, at a certain
price level, it can be denoted that an excess foreign exchange supply is
developed. Thus, the Central Bank does not decide on foreign exchange

purchasing auctions just by İooking at the stock values.
Liguidity Management and Exchange Rate Policy in 2003

29.Following the February 2001 crisis, the Central Bank purchased government

securities worth TL 14 guadrillion from state-owned banks and the banks
transferred to Saving Deposits Insurance Fund (SDIF) in order to meet their
short-term İiguidity needs, and this, in turn, created a substantial amount of
excess İiguidity in the market. This excess İiguidity prevailed throughout 2002
and was TL 9.7 guadrillion by the end of the year.

30. Excess İ1iguidity persisted and varied between TL 5 guadrillion and TL 14

31.

guadrillion throughout 2003. The Turkish lira created through purchasing of
foreign exchange by the Central Bank, interests disbursed as a result of excess
İlguidity withdrawn through open market operations and interests disbursed for
reserve reguirements have been the factors that pushed up excess İiguidity.
Especially, the creation of excess İliguidit y through the Central Bank's int ensive
purchase of foreign exchange as a result of reverse currency substitution and
foreign exchange inflow facilitated the Turkish lira borrowing and net foreign
currency debt payment back of the Treasury, and in a sense has provided the
Treasury an opportunity to sterilize excess İiguidity. Thus, foreign exchange
debt payment back by the Treasury, disbursement of government security
coupons held at Central Bank portfolio by the Treasury and the rise in demand
for base money have been the factors that decreased excess İiguidity. As a
result of these factors, excess İiguidity became approximately TL 8.3 guadrillion

by the end of the year.

The Central Bank sterilized excess liguidity in the market in an active manner, by
means of Turkish lira deposit operations in the Interbank Money Market and of
the reverse repo transactions carried out within the framework of the open

market operations at the Repo and Reverse Repo Market of the Istanbul Stock
32.

33.

Exchange Market and also ensured that the short-term money market interest
rates remained at the pre-determined İevels consistent with the inflation target.
In addition to the four week-maturity Turkish lira deposit auctions, the Central
Bank started two week-maturity Turkish lira deposit purchase auwuctions in
November, with the aim of extending the maturity of the excess İiguidity it has
sterilized and bringing more flexibility to debt management. Central Bank also
lifted the limitation on the auction amount to facilitate the setting of the
amount to be purchased in the auctions Tlexibly according to the market

İlguidity.

The uneven distribution of market İiguidity among the money markets and the
banks has exerted pressure on the money market interest rates from time to
time, especially in May-July period when excess liguidity declined. Nevertheless,
the liguidity facility provided to the primary dealer banks by the Central Bank
prevented excessive volatility in the money market interest rates. Within this
framework, the primary dealer banks resortedtothe Central Bank's limit ed repo

facility three times within the said period.

The Central Bank, whose legal task is to achieve price stability, gives utmost
importance to the supporting objective of maintaining financial stability, and
thus effectively uses immediate tools when faced with threat to Tinancial
stability. Within this framework, the Central Bank minimizes market volatility
with the help of certain measures and announcements. The Central Bank
extended foreign exchange deposit facility to the banks that were experiencing
temporary shortage of foreign exchange İiguidity during the Irag War in March,
and eased the interest rates for such transactions. SimilarIy, following the
terrorist attacks in Istanbul in November, the Bank extended unlimited
borrowing facility to the banks, temporarily pulled down the lending interest
rate, and thus reduced the tension and potential volatility in the markets, by also

helping payment systems to work smoothly.
34 The Central Bank attaches utmost importance to the formation of exchange
rates under market conditions with the minimum intervention possible. This is
because greater stability in exchange rates cannot be achieved through artificial
practices or freguent interventions, but through strengthened macroeconomic
fundamentals and reduced fragility of the economy. Within this framework, in
2003, the Central Bank continued with the effective implementation of the
floating exchange rate regime that was initiated following the February 2001
crisis and let exchange rates be formed under market conditions. The Bank has
not performed any foreign exchange buying or selling operations intended at
determining the İevel or direction of the exchange rates. The Bank's foreign
exchange buying or selling operations aimed at controlling excessive volatilities.
In the May-October 2003 period, due to either excessive volatility in the
exchange rates or those developments that could cause excessive volatility in
the exchange rates, the Central Bank intervened in the foreign exchange market
in the form of foreign exchange buying operations. The Bank did not resort to

foreign exchange selling operations in the said period.

35. Strong international reserves are crucial in the sense that they not onİy enhance
market confidence and effectiveness of the Central Bank monetary policy, but
also facilitate domestic and external borrowing. Within this framework, the
Central Bank intends to increase international reserves at times of foreign
exchange surplus, acting in a manner not to conflict with the floating exchange
rate regime. 2003 was a year of excessive foreign exchange surplus. Together
with increased confidence in the economic program, there has been a decline in
foreign exchange deposit accounts coupled with an intense foreign exchange and
banknote inflow from March onwards, while the demand for Turkish lira
instruments was especially bolstered by foreign investors from August onwards.
With the aim of strengthening its international reserves, the Central Bank
sterilized the foreign exchange surplus by means of auctions in harmony with the

floating regime. In order to increase the effectiveness of the auction method,
the Central Bank made certain revisions in the amounts as well as in the method
of the auctions in line with the formation of a foreign exchange surplus and in
consultation with the market participants. Thus, the Bank mopped up a total of
US dollar 9.9 billion of foreign exchange, of which US dollar 4.2 billion came
from interventions and US dollar 5.7 billion from the auctions. The Turkish lira
İlguidity created in return eguals to Turkish lira 13.9 guadrillion. The amount of
foreign exchange bought by the Central Bank in 2003 is the highest ever bought

by the Bank in one single year.

36.In 2003, the Central Bank continued its contributions to the deepening and
effective functioning of the financial markets by reducing the intermediation
costs of the banking sector. With the aim of reflecting the developments in the
market interest rates, a rule has been laid down for the determination of the
interest rate applied to the Turkish lira reguired reserves. The rule provided
that the interest rate applied to the Turkish lira reguired reserves should be
kept within 75 to 80 percent of the weighted average of the simple interest
rates applicable to deposits in the banking sector. Besides, effective from 2
January 2004, the Central Bank abandoned the practice of charging commission
from transactions, other than those realized under the Daylight Overdraft Limit
facility, in the Interbank Money Market. With this change, the discrepancies
between the Central Bank guotations and the secondary market interest rates
caused by the commissions and taxes will be avoided and the operational costs of

banks will be reduced.

37.The amount of excess İiguidity in the markets may fluctuate once in a while
depending on (i) net foreign exchange borrowing of the Treasury, (ii) Central
Bank's sterilization of excess liguidity that emerged as a result of reverse
currency substitution, inflow of non-system foreign exchange and Toreign
investment, (ili) the amount of credit to be extended to the Saving Deposits

Insurance Fund against payment to the wronged Imarbank depositors, however,
38.

39.

it is expected that the excess İiguidity will continue the course of the average of

2003.

As a preparation for inflation targeting strategy and within the framework of
the modern banking practices, important changes were introduced in the
operational structure of the monetary policy in 2002 and the said practices were
strengthened in 2003. Therefore, no substantial changes are envisaged in the
İiguidity Management strategy in 2004. Excess İiguidity in the market will
continue to be sterilized by means of Turkish lira deposit transactions in the
Interbank Money Market and reverse repos at the Istanbul Stock Exchange
Repo-Reverse Repo Market under the open market operations. Although no
İiguidity shortage is expected in 2004, standard and daylight repo avctions will
be actively used and short-term interest rates will be formed in line with the

Central Bank's interest rates.

At this point, it would be helpful to reiterate the current market arrangements
and the ones that are envisaged to be introduced in 2004:

a. Within the framework of daily transactions and “Late Liguidit y Window”
facility, Central Bank will continue to announce İending and borrowing
interest rates in İine with the inflation target. Thus, short-term money
market interest rates will be formed within the certain band. Within this
framework, the banks will be able to carry out İending or borrowing
operations with the Central Bank within their limits at the Interbank
Money Market between 10:00-16:00 hours and at the ISE Repo-Reverse
Repo Market between 10:00- 14:00 hours.

b. The Central Bank will continue to provide temporary İiguidity to the banks
between 09:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m., restricted with limitations of transactions
withintheframework of “Daylight Overdraft Limit”.

c. The Central Bank will continue to provide liguidity to the banks that are in

need of temporary İiguidity, without any limitations, between 16:00-16:30
hours, through “Late Liguidit y Window Facilit y” within the framework of
the “Lender of Last Resort” function, provided the subject banks keep
adeguate securities.

d. The liguidity facility provided to the primary dealer banks through repo
transactions conducted within the framework of the open market
operations will continue and the interest rates for the subject operations
will be lower than that applicable to the Central Bank's daily lending
operations.

e. The Central Bank will continue to hold Turkish lira deposit auctions that it
introduced to extend the maturity of the term of sterilized liguidity and
to activate monetary policy.

f. Although excess İiguidity is expected to continue in 2004 as well, in the
event of a Turkish lira liguidity shortage, normal repo tenders and guick
repo tenders will be resumed.

g. Banks will be able to buy foreign exchange deposits from the Central Bank
within the described lending limits at the Foreign Exchange Market at the
Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Market. Moreover, the intermediation
transactions at the mentioned market will continue to be limited with the
volume of deposits that they took over from the banks taken into the

receivership of SDIF in 2001.

40. As was observed in 2002 and 2003, the above-mentioned market arrangements

41.

do not only serve to an effective İiguidity management, but also to preventing
the negative impacts of possible exogenous shocks on the markets and excessive
volatility in short-term Turkish lira interest rates. İn order to activate monetary
policy, the Central Bank may imply new arrangements in addition to the above
mentioned ones when it deems necessary.

The floating foreign exchange regime will continue in 2004 and exchange rates

will be determined under market conditions. However, in case of excessive
42.

volatility, the Central Bank may intervene in the foreign exchange market in a
limited manner by selling or buying foreign exchange, as it did in 2003. Moreover,
the Central Bank will continue to build up its foreign exchange reserves as İong
as the developments in balance of payments and reverse currency substitution
process allow. The build up will be handled by means of preannounced transparent
auctions that rely on mechanisms established in collaboration with the market
actors. İn case of an adverse situation, the Central Bank may, with a prior notice,
suspend the auctions before the end of the period. It should be reiterated here
that the foreign exchange reserves has reached guite a satisfactory İevel and
the Central Bank will not resort to any undue interventions. The Central Bank will
continue to attach utmost importance to having a strong reserve position and

prudent management of this reserve, which is the national wealth of Turkey.

Though emphasized several times by the Bank, we want to highlight once more
the risks of bearing open or excessive foreign exchange position under floating
exchange rate regime. In floating exchange rate regimes, the rates may display
severe ups and downs due to exogenous shocks, economic developments and
changes in expectations. The tendency to hold open or excessive foreign
exchange positions further aggravates the severity of these fluctuations. For
this reason, the economic agents are recommended to refrain from holding
foreign exchange position risk and to balance their FX positions with forward
transactions. Therefore, utilization and popularity of the forward transactions
market is very important. The Central Bank provided great support to taxation
and infrastructure arrangements of forward transactions market and actively
participated in the publicity campaign for it. The Central Bank welcomes the
contribution made by this publicity campaign on the development of forward
transactions market in 2003. However, the current developments are not
considered to be adeguate. Therefore, the Central Bank will continue to provide
support to the forward transactions market in the fields of technical assistance

and publicity in 2004 as well.
