August Inflation Outlook and CBRT Interest Rates
I. GENERAL EVALUATTON

1. In August 2004, CPI increased by 0.58 percent while WPI surged by 0.79 percent. Annual CPI and
WPI inflation became 10 percent and İ0.5, respectively.

2. Seasonally adjusted monthly price increases were recorded as İ.İ percent and 1.8 percent in CPI
and WPI respectively while seasonally adjusted monthiy price increases in CPI excluding food and WPI

excluding agriculture became 0.7 percent and 1.8 percent.

Table 1: General CPI, WPI and Sub-items

Annual /0 Change | Monthiy /o Change

2003 2004 2004 2004 2003 — 2004

İ İ Aug Aug W June July Aug. Aug.
CPI 24,9 10,0 -0,1 0,2 0,2 0,6
Goods 24,9 6,5 -0,7 -0,2 -0,7 -0,İ
Services 25,0 16,7 0,9 1,0 1,8 1,7
Excl. Food 23,1 10,6 0,8 0,4 0,7 0,7
Food 31,5 8,0 -3,3 -0,6 -İ,7 0,1
WPI 22,7 10,5 -i1,1 -1,5 -0,2 0,8
Public 19,4 13,4 2,0 1,8 1,5 2,3
Private 24,1 9,4 -2,2 -2,8 -0,8 0,2
Public Manufacture 22,9 16,0 1,5 2,7 1,6 2,3
Private Manufacture 18,5 10,8 1,2 0,3 0,7 1,5
Agriculture 36,8 6,4 -8,İ -8,6 -4,0 -2,5
Excl. Agriculture 19,0 11,8 1,5 0,8 1,0 1,8
Exci. Agr. and Energy 19,7 12,6 1,6 0,8 1,1 1,8

Source: CBRT, SIS

3. The six-month average of seasonally adjusted inflation was 1.14 percent in WPI and 1.06 in CPI.
The mentioned average rates of increase correspond to 14.5 percent and 13.5 percent in annual
terms. In the same period again, the average rate of increase in seasonally adjusted CPI excluding

food became 0.87 percent, which corresponds to İl percent in annual terms (Figure İ).
Figure 1: Annual Percentage Change and Guarteriy Moving Averages
CPI and CPI Excluding Food WPI and WPI Excluding Agriculture

—— Annualized CPI(*) —— Annualized WPI(*)

— —Annualized CPI Excluding Food(*)

- — Z Annualized WPİ Exc. Agriculture(*)

AY

02:01 02:04 02:07 — 02:10 03:01 03:04 03:07 — 03:10 — 04:01 04:04 04:07 02:01 02:04 02:07 - 02:10 03:01 03:04- 03:07. 03:10 04:01 04:04 04:07

(*) Ovarteriy Moving Averages (Annualized, Seasonally Adjusted).
Source: CBRT, SIS.

Developments in consumer prices

4. Despite the relatively high rate of increase in the services group prices in August 2004, seasonal
decline in clothing prices, limited increase in food prices, and decrease in durable goods prices
restricted the CPI inflation. In August 2004, increase in service group prices was 1.7 percent whereas
goods group prices declined by 0.1 percent. Seasonal effects coupled with the absence of demand
pressures in semi-durable and non-durable goods had an impact on the favorable course of goods
group prices. In the first 8-month period, while seasonally adjusted cumulative price increase was 5.9

percent in goods group, İit was 9.4 percent in service group.

5. In the education services sector whose prices are adjusted only in August and September, the
tuition fees of private schools and courses increased by 15.7 percent and İ2.7 percent respettively,
causing the monthliy increase in education prices to rise to 9.2 percent. Tuition fees in universities
increased almost by 15 percent and this shows that increases in education prices will be effective in
pushing up the CPI inflation also in September 2004. The upward trend in rents continues as well. As
of August 2004, whereas CPI inflation is 10 percent, the yearly inflation rate of education and rent
groups are 21.6 percent and 20.8 percent respectively. This shows the continuation of the price

rigidity in services group.

6. In the goods group, food prices had a limited increase of 0.1 percent, whereas clothing and
footwear prices decreased by 3.2 percent in August 2004 following the 3.7 percent decline in July
2004. In the first eight months of 2004, cumulative increase in the prices of seasonally adjusted food
and clothing prices were 6.3 percent and 4.9 percent, respectively, remaining below the 7.3 percent
cumulative increase of seasonally adjusted CPI in the same period. As of September, the favorable

seasonal effects in both groups are expected to reverse.
7. Another sub-group affecting the decline of goods group prices was the durable goods prices,
decreasing by 2.5 percent in August 2004. Prices of personal transportation vehicles and culturalrecreational instruments within this group, which is known to be sensitive to exchange rate

developments and demand conditions, declined by 3.9 percent.

8. It is difficult to distinguish the demand effect on the clothing and durable goods prices due to
favorable seasonal effects and cost conditions. Meanwhile, the 3.9 percent increase in furniture and
flooring prices that are known to have high demand elasticity and the 12 percent rise observed in
cumulative prices as of August are remarkable.

Figure 2: Prices of Goods and Services
Annual Percentage Change Monthliy Percentage Change

(Seasonally Adjusted)*

— —Services —— Goods

02:01 02:04 02:07. 02:10 03:01 03:04 03:07 03:10 04:01 04:04- 04:07

1

Source: CBRT, SIS.

*TRAMO/SEATS method has been used for deseasonalization.

9. Furthermore, the medicine prices under government control increased by 6.2 percent and
therefore health prices remained above CPI inflation with a 1.9 percent increase. Moreover, although
house and transportation prices are affected by the 5 percent price increase on petroleum products as
of 10 August 2004, it is observed that the price increases in the mentioned groups are partially

compensated by other sub-items.

10.1In this framework, the seasonally adjusted CPI inflation and CPI excluding food decreased in
August compared to their averages in the last three months. In August, annual CPI inflation rose from
9.4 to 10 percent due to the base effect, meanwhile annual CPI inflation excluding food remained at

10.6 percent (Figure 3).

02:01 - 02:04 02:07 02:10 03:01 03:04 03:07 - 03:10 - 04:01 04:04 04:07
Figure 3: CPI and CPI Excluding Food

Annual Percentage Change Monthiy Percentage Change
(Seasonally Adjusted)*

U | | — —CPI Exc. Food ——CPI —|

02:01 02:04 02:07 — 02:10 03:01 03:04 03:07 — 03:10 - 04:01 - 04:04 04:07 02:01 02:04- 02:07. 02:10 03:01 03:04 03:07 03:10 04:01 04:04- 04:07

Source: CBRT, SIS.
TRAMO/SEATS method has been used for deseasonalization.

Developments in Wholesale Prices

11.In August, the manufacturing industry dominated the increase in WPI. In this period, public
manufacturing industry prices rose by 2.3 percent on monthiy basis. The biggest contribution to this
price increase came from petroleum products manufacturing and basic metal industry sectors.
Exchange rate changes and the increases in world commodity prices played an important role in this

development.

12.Meanwhile, private manufacturing industry prices rose by 1.5 percent in August. Chemicals
production and furniture manufacturing sectors made the largest contribution to the mentioned
increase. The increase in the chemicals production sector can be explained by the changes in
exchange rates and oil prices, stemming from the major usage of petroleum products and imported
input in this sector. The high rate of increase in furniture manufacturing sector is considered to reflect
the seasonal effects as well as the relative recovery in domestic demand. In August 2004, the annual
inflation in furniture manufacturing sector rose from 15.9 percent to 35.3 percent compared to the

same month of the previous year.

13.1In August, agricultural prices declined by 2.5 percent owing to the fall in fresh fruit and vegetable

prices. However, seasonally adjusted agricultural prices increased by 1.1 percent.

14.Energy prices maintained their current trend and rose by 0.1 percent. It is observed that the

energy prices has displayed a downward trend on an annual basis with a 1.8 percent decline.
100

60

40

20

0

Figure 4: WPI and WPI Excluding Agriculture

Annual Percentage Change Monthiy Percentage Change
(Seasonally Adjusted)*

T T T 6 T w

— —WPI Exc. Agriculture :

aa 4 w Si t Mi — —WPI Exc. Agriculture ——WPI |

S 2

—
T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T - 2

02:01 02:04 02:07 02:10 03:01 - 03:04 03:07 03:10 04:01 04:04 04:07 02:01 02:04 02:07  02:10 03:01 03:04 03:07. 03:10 04:01 04:04- 04:07
Source: CBRT, SIS.
*TRAMO/SEATS method has been used in deseasonalization.

15.1In this respect, the annual WPI and WPI excluding agriculture rose by 10.5 and 11.8 percent
respectively in August. In the upcoming period, the developments in international crude oil prices may
affect energy prices, especiallıy petroleum products. Furthermore, the seasonal effect of the

agriculture sector limiting inflation will be removed.
II. OUTLOOK

Outlook for the General Factors Affecting Inflation

16. While creating an information set about future inflation, it is important that the signals about
future prospects given by recent price developments are truly comprehended and the likely course of

the factors affecting the general price level in the coming period is well evaluated.

e — Despite the high capacity utilization rates and the gradual narrowing in output gap in the recent
period, no significant acceleration was observed in consumer prices in the first half of the year.
This has resulted mainly from the fact that the relative recovery in domestic demand in the said
period did not extend through all sectors as well as from the significant rises in productivity in the
sectors where high rates of increase are observed in production — especially in durable goods
sector. In the following period, the variables to be monitored in terms of inflation will be domestic
demand indicators as well as the rise in productivity and the course of the unit labor costs. In the

light of current data, the following points can be specified:

. Historicaliy high level of capacity utilization rates, lack of a full-competition
environment and the signals for a rise in employment are pointing out that the
productivity increase may slow down in the coming period compared to the last
three years. However, it İs estimated that the ongoing investment trend since the
last guarter of 2003 would support the productivity boost in the forthcoming
period. The support of unit labor costs to the downward trend in inflation might
weaken relatively in the following periods. Nevertheless, it is anticipated that the
productivity boosts will continue to exert a downward pressure on unit labor costs
as long as the adjustments concerning the removal of the obstacles to investment

and production are continued.

# The marked slowdown in money demand, automobile sales and the volume of
total credits in recent period and the relative liguldity contraction in the markets
are the significant developments in domestic demand. These developments point
out that the rise in economic activity ongoing for the last four guarters might lose
momentum iİn the coming period. Related to this issue, developments in
consumer credits and leading indicators for domestic demand components are

continued to be monitored carefully.

e — Consumer prices increased cumulatively by 3.9 percent in the first eight months of 2004. This
rise took place regardless of the recent rapid rises in world crude oil prices and the volatility in

exchange rate. The margin created by the fact that the increase in consumer prices in the first
eight months of the year remained even below the path consistent with the inflation target
indicates that the probability of achieving the year-end target is high even in cases of possible

external shocks.

Thanks to a monetary policy strategy focused on price stability, and the disciplined fiscal
policies under the current economic program that has been strictly implemented for a long
time, inflation expectations are brought under control, inflation target has gradually reinforced
its function as an anchor, and a structural transformation has begun in pricing behaviors. As a
conseguence, from the point we stand today, announced inflation target is now perceived by
economic agents as a strong reference point. In this context, it is anticipated that the inflation
expectations would not deviate markedIy from the target in the rest of 2004 and the
upcoming period as far as the perceptions about the continuation of the current program are

reinforced in a similar approach with more emphasis on structural reforms.

Downward trend in inflation expectations, enhanced competitiveness and the ongoing
monetary and fiscal discipline limit the effect of cost increases on prices. Moreover, under the
floating exchange rate regime, financial assets denominated in foreign currencies have now
become relatively more risky instruments, hence exchange rates can move in either
directions. This fact contributes to the breaking of indexation mechanisms and slows down the
pass-through effect from exchange rate to İnflation— particularliy in consumer prices. As long
as the fiscal and monetary policies are implemented in consistency with the inflation target
and the oligopolistic markets are minimized by enhancing free competition, this change in

pricing behavior will become more permanent.

The rigidity in services prices and the relative price differentiation among commodity-services
groups continue. Seasonally adjusted cumulative price increase for the first eight months of
the year was 5.9 percent for the commodity group and 9.4 percent for the services group.
This can be explained partially by the high productivity increases in the sectors producing
commodity groups, and partially by higher sensitivity to the exchange rate of the commodity
group prices compared to the services group. However, past pricing habits persist in some
sectors in the services group—especially in rental, health and education services—, in a
manner difficult to explain the differentiation solely by the two above-mentioned factors. The
fact that annual education services prices and rent increases realize above some 20 percent at
a period when general price increases occur around 10 percent captures attention. Relative
price differentiations that may arise out of a clear deviation of any sub-item from the general
trend will be more important than ever in the coming period where lasting price stability is

targeted.

Tax revenues that have surpassed targets owing to the prevailing fiscal discipline and the high
growth performance in 2004, enabled that the rise in oil prices that was beyond budgetary

forecasts was reflected to the petroleum prices only in a limited manner. It is predicted that
the revival in economic activity will slow down in 2005 and growth will realize at a lower level
compared to this year. Besides the likelihood that the relative vigor in global economy will
continue in 2005 as well, signals that the high levels of commodity prices will not reverse in
the short run. In this case, it will be more difficult next year to implement the strategy of
partially reflecting the high raw material costs onto the prices, giving up tax revenues.
Moreover, such a strategy is not sustainable in the medium term. Lasting solution lies in the
deepening of public sector fiscal adjustment. It is important to emphasize once more at this
point that the efforts towards backing up fiscal discipline with structural reforms such as social
security and tax reforms are percelived as positive developments. Certainiy, even if the
foundations of these reforms are immediately laid, concrete outcomes for the revenue and
expenditure sides will be obtained in the medium and long-term. Yet, the effects of such steps

on expectations will make significant contributions to the sustainability of current balances.

Just like the rest of the world, unforeseeable deviations in oil prices constitute a risk factor for
Turkey as well. “Primary effects” of the recent increases in raw material import prices on
inflation, directly and also through input costs began to be felt especially in the second half of
the year. However, “secondary” effects of such shocks —a deterioration in the medium and
long term inflation expectations and the signal for its reflection on prices— have not occurred
yet. In other words, if the above-mentioned basic conditions are provided, inflation will
resume its downward trend when the external factors increasing input costs disappear.
Moreover, ongoing favorable developments as regards the prices of electricity, which is
another important iİnput item, are limiting total cost increase. Still, secondary effects of

especially the oil price increases will be closely monitored in the coming period.

The decline in food prices in the said period made a significant contribution to the favorable
course of inflation during the first eight months of the year. However, such contribution may
vary depending on natural conditions and seasonal trends. Thus, price developments in the
said items, independent of their direction, contain very little information regarding future

inflation and play hardIy any role in the monetary policy decisions.

The index targeted by the Central Bank within the framework of the current regime is the
consumer prices index; WPI does not possess any target nature. The figures given in the
economic program for the WPI increase are for projection purposes. Certainiy, with a futurelooking point of view, wholesale prices are important within the framework of the information
they contain as regards the consumer prices. Along the same lines, while manufacturing
sector price developments will be closely monitored; in an environment where monetary and
fiscal discipline sustains and incomes and wage policy of the public sector designed in
harmony with the targets, recent WPI increases are believed to continue having only limited

effect on the consumer prices.
17.Finally, certain points as regards the twelve-month cumulative inflation figures should be
underlined once again. It was pointed out several times since the beginning of the year in both the
monthly inflation analysis and also the guarteriy monetary policy reports that annual inflation would
decline in the first half of the year, and that while it might go up in the second half of the year, this
would be entirely within the framework of the targets. As a matter of fact, annual inflation figures
recorded only minor increases in July and August in line with forecasts, compared to previous months.
As emphasized before, annual inflation figure is an entirely backward-looking variable, the monthliy
change of which is linked also to the inflation figure pertaining to the same month of the previous
year. This may lead to misinterpretations from time to time. For example, a rise in the annual inflation
figure for August might be presented erroneousiy as “inflation being in an upward irend in August”.
On the contrary, with a value of 0.7 percent, seasonally adjusted non-food CPI increase in August
displayed a tendency coherent with the inflation target; it even manifested a decline when compared
with July. Yet, on account of the extraordinary performance in August last year, the annual inflation
figure for August 2004 appears as İf it rose compared to the previous month— as a conseguence of

the base effect.

Current Account Deficit and Inflation
18.1It is observed that the arguments around the recent increase in current account deficit are
debated within the framework of old habits, not in the context of economic policies and measures to

be taken. At this point, it is deemed useful to emphasize the following points once more.

19.First of all, under the ongoing program implemented, the Turkish economy has made great
progress on the way of “normalization”. İt is clear that the continuation of a similar program in the
coming period as well, fragilities in the Turkish economy would further diminish and thus the level of
sustainable current account deficit would go up, thanks to an environment of macroeconomic stability,
strengthening institutional structure and a likely improvement in the guality of the financing resources.
Such structural change was experienced by several countries that have passed through a similar

process.

20. The second point to be highlighted is that the deterioration in current account recentlİy observed is
a “natural” outcome of a period marked by a growth rate surpassing the rate foreseen by the
program. The importance attached to monitoring a growth rate in the current account deficit that
exceeds program projections should also be attached to monitoring a growth rate in economic activity
that exceeds projections. It should be borne in mind that what Turkey needs is not a rapid, unstable
growth, but a sustained growth that is consistent with the current program. To this aim, some
selective measures shall be taken such as: some incentives provided for certain sectors (for instance
the auto scrap discount) should be revised, some İlimitations on the supply side should be introduced,
which would decrease the rapid growth rates in loans to an acceptable level (if these rates are
deemed to be conflicting the objective of attaining a healthier financial sector) and would be

consistent with the international financial sector norms, the additional tax revenues that emerged as a
result of production exceeding the projections should be saved. Some steps to these aims have
already been taken. In case of need, some additional measures similar to those might become

necessary in the upcoming period.

21. Another point to be highlighted is the role of the monetary policy. It should not be missed that
rapid growth and high current account deficit was observed in a period marked by high interest rates
in real terms. Therefore, implementing an interest rate policy according to the developments in
current account instead of future inflation rate —the method successfully implemented till now- would
serve no good, giving confusing signals and affecting expectations adversely. Meanwhile, it should be
borne in mind that deterioration in current account emerged in an economy where exchange rates are
determined under market conditions. Despite there still exist different views about the ideal exchange
rate regime; the floating exchange rate regime has proved to be very beneficial in the period following
the 2000-2001 crisis. It is expected that the floating exchange rate regime will be able to play its
automatic stabilization role in a more determined way as the structural problems, which cause higher
real interest rates and lead to much higher levels occasionally, are settled (such as decreasing the
deficits of social security system, reducing underground economy and expanding tax base, achieving
an efficiently-operating financial system and profound financial market) and the factors that might

lead to expectations about interruption in the implementation of the program are eliminated.

22. At this point, a natural guestion that should be asked by the Central Bank under the current
conditions is “How intensely can the deterioration in current account affect inflation?” As stipulated in
the Central Bank Law, the primary objective of the Central bank is to achieve price stability; therefore,
it would be wise to re-evaluate the channels through which the deterioration in current account might

affect inflation.

a. The first channel emerges as the possibility that the deterioration in current account and the
expectations thereon might unfavorabiy affect future inflation through the volatilities they cause in the
exchange rate. This is not and will not be a strong probability considering the significant steps taken
in the way of enacting a new medium-term program under preparation backed by international
institutions. Achievements made under the current program and the gradually lessening vulnerability

of the economy to external shocks set the greatest evidence.

b. The second channel is the correlation between the factors leading to the deterioration in
current account and inflation dynamics. As the exchange rate channel, which has already been
discussed above, one of the leading factors to be mentioned is the high rate of growth. The guestion
here is: To what extent is the rapid growth a threat to the downward trend in inflation? In order to be
able to give a satisfactory answer to this guestion, it is necessary to analyze an important variable, the
output gap. Considering the rapid rise in private investment expenditures recentiy and the persistent
rise in productivity, it can asserted that the potential production level is increasing. According to the
calculations made by the Central Bank, production level did not reach to an extent to threaten the

downward trend in inflation. Moreover, output gap İs only one of the variables determining inflation

10
and not the most important one as well. Considering the conditions of the labor market, establishing
control over disposable income through the continuation of fiscal discipline, increases in productivity
and the other factors mentioned in article 16, there will not be a pressure, which may cause a

significant increase in inflation, in the upcoming period.

Conclusion
23.1In conclusion, there are no such risk factors that would evidentiy pose a threat for the attainment
of the inflation target for 2004. However, there are certain risks for the year 2005. First of all, neither
domestic demand developments nor labor costs would provide as much support to the downward
trend in inflation as they used to provide in the last three years. Moreover, high oil prices might push
up the energy costs, leading to a pressure on current account and inflation while the likely liguidity
contraction and rises in interest rates in the international markets would exert a pressure on exchange
rate. However, the important criteria for the inflation trend of the coming period are budget discipline,
the guality of the budget discipline, the uninterrupted continuation of the structural reform process
consisting of tax and social security reforms that would support the budget discipline in the coming
period as well and inflation target-based monetary policy implementations. As long as these policies
are carried out effectively, it is clear that the downward trend in inflation will continue even if it might
display fluctuations at times due to external shocks. In this framework, the announcements, which
focused on the political will about the adherence to the fundamental principles of the current
economic program in 2005 and the upcoming periods, helped remove the uncertainties about the new
economic program to be adopted and strengthened our belief in the sustainability of Zhe downward
trend in prices of the items excluding tihe ones such as Ffood and energy which are determined by
extemal factors. Conseguentiy, under these circumstances and in the light of current data, a cut down

in short-term interest rates İs deemed appropriate.

24. However, one last point needs to be emphasized again for a better understanding of some
aspects of monetary policy: In those countries that have achieved stability or that have attained
significant progress in this respect, it İis common for a central bank whose primary objective is to
achieve price stability to reduce or to raise as well the short-term interest rates, which is the basic
policy instrument, depending on the conditions of the economy. It is a basic fact that central banks
act as such to maintain the economic stability. In the final analysis, if central banks do not take these
steps when the conditions arise, then they should be criticized. Therefore, as has been the case until
now, only future inflation will be taken into consideration while shaping the monetary policy; in case
of clear signals for an inconsistency between the future course of inflation and the targets coupled
with the perceptions that this inconsistency might turn out to be permanent in the medium/long-term,

interest rate policies will be used effectively.

il
III. — THE CENTRAL BANK INTEREST RATES
25.1n the light of the developments above, the Central Bank (CBRT) has decided to cut short-term
interest rates applied at CBRT Interbank Money Market and Repo-Reverse Repo Market at Istanbul

Stock Exchange as follows to be effective from September 8, 2004:

a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing interest rate was cut down to 20 percent from 22

percent and lending interest rate to 24 percent from 27 percent.

b) Other Maturity: One-week borrowing interest rate was cut down to 20 percent from 22

percent.

c) Late Liguidity Window Interest Rates: Within the framework of Late Liguidity Window Facility,
CBRT overnight borrowing interest rate applicable between 16:00 — 16:30 Hours at Interbank Money
Market was cut down to 28 percent from 32 percent. Borrowing interest rate of b percent remained

the same.

d) The interest rates on overnight and one-week maturity borrowing facilities provided for primary
dealer banks via repo transactions within the framework of open market transactions were cut down

to 22 percent from 24 percent.

12
€T

Âsrins suone)29dx3 Lya3 :924Nos

cI

Ol

<£00XT

FOOCZ

SUJUON ZT 1X9N SU) 40j SUONL3DOdXI UONLYUT

£00XT

VFOOXT

)931e|, UONN)EYUL ——

SUO1T)L)99dİX93Y UOT)EYUT PU9S IASA ——

9OT

jöbade | UoONNLYUT pue suoi)e)399dx3 uoNzLyYÜUT JesÂ-pu3
VOOC-£00X€

ç aanbı4

Aorins suomn)ep3adxı LA9I 01 Bulp1oIIy SUON)L399dXx3 UONLYUT
