July Inflation and Outlook

I. GENERAL EVALUATTON

i. In July 2004, CPI increased by 0.22 percent while WPI dropped by 1.52 percent. Annual CPI
and WPrI inflaton became 9.6 percent and 9.4 percent, respectively.

2. Seasonaliy adjusted monthly price increases were recorded as 1.4 percent and - 0.3 percent
in CPI and WPI respectively, while seasonaliy adjusted monthly price increases in CPI excluding food

and WPI excluding agriculture became 0.9 percent and 0.8 percent.

Table 1: General CPI, WPI and Sub-items

Annual Vo Change Monthiy /o Change

2003 2004 2004 2004 2003 2004

July July May June July July

CPI 27.4 -0.4 0.2
Goods 27.3 -1.3 -0.2
Services 27.8 1.4 1.0
Exci. Food 25.5 0.7 0.4
Food 34 .4 -3.8 -0.6
WPI 25.6 -0.5 -1.5
Public 20.9 0.8 1.8
Private 27.5 -1.1 -2.8
Public Manufacture 23.9 1.0 2.7
Private Manufacture 20.3 0.5 0.3
Agriculture 43.7 -3.9 -8.6
Excl. Agriculture 20.8 0.6 0.8
Excli. Agr. and Energy 21.3 0.6 0.8

Source: CBRT, SIS.

3. — The six-month average of seasonally adjusted inflation was 0.98 percent in WPI and 1.04 in
CPI. The mentioned average rates of increase correspond to İ2.4 percent and 13.2 percentin annual
terms. In the same period again, the average rate of increase in seasonally adjusted CPI excluding
food became 0.95 percent, which corresponds to 12.1 percent in annual terms (Figure 1). As
illustrated in the figure, a relative increase is observed in the six-month moving average of seasonally
adjusted inflation figures in the last couple of months. A significant part of this increase stems from
the margin of errors in seasonal coefficients due to the rapid decline in inflation in the last few years.
Since seasonal coefficients are estimated by using past data, they include the impact of volatility
created by the past period's high inflatıonary environment and this may lead to misinterpretation
especialiy in the months when seasonality is dominant. For instance, seasonally adjusted figures may
look higher than they actualiy are in June and July; whereas they are lower than they are İn January,
September and October. Thus, even if the pace of the upward trend in general prices remains stable,
the six-month averages of seasonally adjusted inflatton seem to be higher in June and July; and lower

in September and October again. Therefore, the CBRT reports short-term seasonally adjusted figures,
but does not put emphasis on them in the Outlook section. It is expected that seasonaliy adjusted
figures will be more reliable when sufficient data has been accumulated under the İow-inflation

environment.

Figure 1: Annual Percentage Change and Guarteriy Moving Averages
CPI and CPI Excluding Food WPI and WPI Excluding Agriculture

—— Annualized WPI(*)

—— Annualized CPI(*
© — — Annualized WPI Exc. Agriculture(*)

— — Annualized CPT Excluding Food(*)

02:01 - 02:04- 02:07 02:10 03:01 03:04 03:07 O30 04:01 04:04. 04:07 02:01 - 02:04 02:07 02:10- 03:01 03:04 O307 O3:10 04:01 04:04. 04:07

(*) Ouartery Moving Averages (Annualized, Seasonaliy Adjusted).
Source: CBRT, SIS.

Developments in consumer prices
4, Besides the seasonal decline in food and clothing prices, there were mainly three factors
affecting the CPI inflation in July, which are: i) decline in exchange rates, İl) rise in public prices and

ili) rigidity in services group prices.

5, In line with the weakening correlation between exchange rates and inflation under floating
exchange rate regime, it is observed that the impact of exchange rate movements on inflation has
remained limited in April-May period. Moreover, 2.7 percent decline in exchange rates in July helped
constraining those lagged effects. One of the sub-items, which displayed a relatively higher rate of
increase despite the reversed trend in exchange rates, was electrical and non-electrical house-hold
appliances under durable goods group. Despite the limited rise of 0.3 percent in durable goods group,
which is known to be the group most severely affected by exchange rate developments, the rise in
electrical and non-electrical household appliances prices became 3 percent. Another price group on
which the depreciation of the Turkish lira was affective, is the petroleum products and natural gas
group. Rise in exchange rates and in crude oil prices caused a 5 percent increment in petroleum
products prices first in May and then in June. The rise in petroleum products was followed by a 6.5

percent increase in natural gas prices.

6. Price increases in the housing and transportatlon groups were influenced by the rise in
petroleum products and natural gas prices. Furthermore, the 20 percent increase in the bridge and

pay road tolls affected prices of transportatlon services. Besides, due to the 12 percent İncrease in
sugar prices, which became effective as of June 18?, crystal sugar prices increased by 6 percent in

July, hampering the seasonal decrease in food prices.

7. — Apart from the exchange rate and increase in public prices, another determining factor in July
CPI inflation is service prices. In the health services group that sets prices twice a year — in January
and July —he sub-items of medical services and hospital services prices increased by 1.7 percent and
2.1 percent respectively in July. Thus, in these two groups January-July period cumulative increase
realized as 8.3 percent and 15.8 percent, respectively. Even though the increase in the prices of
hospital services, which was 46.5 percent by the end of 2003, dropped to 17.5 percent by July 2004,
the price adjustments are not yet brought in line with the inflation target and the price rigidity in this

group is still continuing.

8. Meanwhile, in July rents rose by 1.1 percent and hotel services prices increased by 2.3 percent
due to the seasonal pressure caused by the tourism season. Hence, the hike in the prices of services
became İ percentin July. The seasonally adjusted increase in the prices of services, which was 1.2
percent on average iİn the first six months of the year, rolled back to İ percentin July.

Figure 2: Prices of Goods and Services
Annual Percentage Change Monthliy Percentage Change
(Seasonally Adjusted)*

— —Services —— Goods

— —Services —— Goods

02:01 — 02:04- 02:07 02:10- 03:01 03:04- 03:07 O3:10 — 04:01 04:04- 04:07

Source: CBRT, SIS.
*TRAMO/SEATS method has been used for deseasonalzation.

02:01 — 02:04- 02:07 — 02:10 03:01 03:04 03:07 — O3:10 — 04:01 - 04:04 04:07

9. Goods prices, which displayed a limited decline of 0.2 percent due to the increase in public prices,
rose by 1i.5 percent in seasonally adjusted terms. In the first seven months of the year, the seasonaliy
adjusted cumulative price increase became 4.6 and 8.6 percent in goods and services group,

respectively.

10. The fact that the food prices, displayed a decline well below seasonal averages, pull up the
seasonaliy adjusted CPI inflation. In fact, analyzing in terms of the seasonally adjusted figures, it is
cleariy seen that the CPI inflatton excluding food (0.9 percent) remained below the general CPI

inflation (1.4 percent). Undoubtediy, these figures should be interpreted in line with the hesitations
mentioned in the third paragraph. Besides, the annual CPI inflation rose to 9.6 percent in July from
8.9 percent in June whereas the annual CPI inflation excluding food dropped from 10.9 percent to

10.6 percent.

Figure 3: CPI and CPI Excluding Food

Annual Percentage Change Monthliy Percentage Change
(Seasonally Adjusted)*

— CP

02:01  02:04- 02:07 - 02:10- 03:01 03:04 03:07 O3:10 — 04:01 04:04. 04:07 02:01 02:04 02:07 02:10 03:01 03:04- 03:07 O3:10 04:01 04:04 04:07

Source: CBRT, SIS.
TRAMO/SEATS method has been used for deseasonalization.

Developments in Wholesale Prices

li. In the first half of the year, due to the demand pressure on the prices of various raw materials
used in industrial sector, driven by high growth in China, iron and steel prices increased; thus the
basic metal prices in public manufacturing industry were negatively affected. Although stability is
observed in iron and steel prices in the recent months, world crude oil prices continue to mount and
prices of the petroleum products manufacturing industry display high rates of increase due to the

reflection of international oil prices on domestic prices.

12. In July, 0.61 points of the 1.52 percent monthly decline in the WPI derived from the price hikes in
public sector whereas —2.13 points of this decline stemmed from the price drops in private sector. The
mentioned contribution of the private sector came from the agricultural prices, which dropped due to

seasonal effects. In addition, the seasonalliy adjusted WPI dropped by 0.3 percent in July.

13. Also in July, agricultural prices decreased by 8.6 percent owing to the fall in fresh fruit and
vegetables prices. It is observed that the seasonalliy adjusted agricultural prices declined by 3.3
percent in July after the drop of 1.3 percent in June. Contrarily, when the agricultural prices, which
dropped owing to seasonal effects, are excluded from WPI, WPI excluding agriculture is recorded to

increase by 0.8 percent.

14. Public manufacturing industry prices are affected by the price adjustments in petroleum products

and sugar. Private manufacturing industry prices slowed down along with the stability of the exchange
rate and are negatively affected by the increases in petroleum prices. However it is observed thatthe

mentioned effects are limited due to the decline in food and textile products prices.

Figure 4: WPI and WPI Excluding Agriculture

Annual Percentage Change Monthly Percentage Change
(Seasonally Adjusted)*

60

I
I
I
—
I
I

40

20

0
02:01 — 02:04- — 02:07 — 02:10 03:01 03:04 O307 O30 04:01 04:04 04:07 02:01  02:04- 02:07 — 02:10 03:01 03:04 03:07 O3i1O- 04:01 04:04- 04:07

Source: CBRT, SIS.
*TRAMO/SEATS method has been used in deseasonalization.

15. Energy prices maintained their current course and rose by 0.1İ percent. Energy prices continue to

decrease by 2.2 percentin annual terms.

16. Hence, the annual WPI increase rolled back to 9.4 percent in July. Meanwhile, WPI excluding
agriculture rose to 10.9 percent annualliy. Considering the fact that high fluctuations in WPI are
determined by the agricultural sector and that the agricultural prices display a volatile course, İt is
predicted that WPI will pursue a fluctuating course in the upcoming period, while WPI excluding

agriculture may continue to rise in line with the developments in crude oil prices and exchange rate.

İT. OUTLOOK

General Macroeconomic Outlook

i17. Atthis period of the year when the general macroeconomic outlook of 2004 starts to take shape,
it is observed that the current economic program implemented with coherence for a long time has
yielded much achievements in terms of macroeconomic stability and price stability despite the external
uncertainttes encountered at times. Achieving a steep decline in inflation in three consecutive years
along with high growth rates in national income can be attributed greatiy to the current economic
program implemented without any compromise. However, it should certainiy be kept in mind that
much remains to be done, the economic balances have not yet been established permanently and

price stability has not yet been achieved completely. Still, much progress has been made in the way of
stabilizatlon, and in terms of macroeconomic indicators; significant changes were made in institutional

structure compared to the previous periods.

18. The primary objectives of the current program are to relieve the Turkish economy from its current
vicious circles by improving the general macroeconomic environment and expectations, to create an
environment in which economic agents are able to make healthy predictions by bringing down
inflaton and debt burden and to achieve an enduring macroeconomic stability by ensuring a more
effective allocation of resources through structural transformations. By the mid-2004, important
achievements were made in many areas and the improvement in basic macroeconomic variables
surpassed the expectations; however, there is still much to do in terms of achieving absolute price

stability as well as permanent macroeconomic stability.

19. Taken in the light of experiences, it is clear that the current program increased immunity to
external shocks and as long as the reguirements of the program are fulfiled, the main trend has
always been towards the better. For instance, the external shocks and uncertainties arising from the
Irag operation in the first months of 2003 had only a limited effect on the economy and the downward
trend in inflation and the recovery in economic activities continued in the period following the removal
of these factors as İt was perceived that the reguirements of the program would be fulfilled. It should
also be keptin mind thatthe main trend dominated following the volatility in exchange rate in October
2003 and the downward trend in inflation as well as growth in the economy continued. Finally, the
signals given since mid-April by the Federal Reserve Bank of the USA for alikely rise in interest rates
in the coming months led to changes in global liguidity and risk trends, thus increasing the
fluctuations in the financial markets. Moreover, above-mentioned developments coincided with the
periodic uncertainties on foreign policy and the rapid rise in current account deficit. However,
fluctuations were rather limited thanks to the signals given for the continuation of the monetary and
fiscal discipline and the structural reforms brought on the agenda concerning social security and tax

reforms. Thus, the main trend has turned into direction of macroeconomic stability again.

20. The policies implemented within the framework of the stabilizaton program and a comparison of
the program period with the past highlight the importance of concrete, transparent, accountable and
comprehensive programs in shaping the future-lboking perceptions. The most important economic
anchor perceived by public is highly credible commitments with robust arrangements and reforms
which sustain the discipline and reduce the structural fragilities in general economic policies, rather
than a monetary or a financial variable. In this context, the fact thatthe macroeconomic framework of
the upcoming period was brought to a conclusion phase in a platform involvin g also the Central Bank,
and that this framework envisages the continuation of fiscal discipline and structural reforms is

perceived to be a favorable development.

21.In the first half the year, growth originated greatly from private consumption and private
investment. It is anticipated that the growth composition of the second guarter of 2004 will follow a

course parallel to that of the first guarter. As for the second half of the year, a relative domestic
demand-based slowdown can be observed in growth rate in line with the recentiy rising interest rates
and the fluctuations in exchange rate. However, the upward trend in investments and the strong
course of foreign demand are expected tolimit this slowdown. Accordingiy, under the assumptlon that
no great external shock emerges in the short run, the rate of growth in natilonalincome will be higher
than the projections of the program pertaining to early 2004. In line with these developments, it is
estimated thatthe imports of intermediary goods and investment goods will be high for the rest ofthe
year and as a result of the rise in imports, which accelerate in accordance with the economic activity,
the year-end current account deficit might be higher compared to the previous years despite the
strong performance of exports and tourism revenues. Considering the structural dynamics of our
country, it should not be deemed a surprise that the current account deficit becomes high where

growth is registered to be higher than foreseen.

22. As is the case for the last three years, the Central Bank will continue to shape its monetary policy
by taking into consideration the attainment of a consistency between the actual level of inflation for
the next period and the inflation target and thus will avoid giving confusing signals to economic
agents. It is apparent that the above-mentioned strategy bears an important role in shaping the
expectations about inflation, and inflation targets are gradually becoming a more effective anchor.
The same monetary policy framework greatly contributes to the efforts for sustaining the fight against
inflatton and high growth rates concurrentiy. Therefore, there is no guestion of a direct intervention to
the current account deficit by the Central Bank under the current monetary and exchange rate policy.
Above all, in an environment where real interest rates are mostiy determined by the volatilities in risk
premium and the exchange rate level is set under the market conditions, such a policy reaction is sure
to prove İneffective. Besides, it will lead to confusions in the signals to be given and affect the

expectations unfavorabiy.

23. Meanwhile, it is very İmportant to accurately analyze the channels through which the deterioration
in current account might affect future inflation. The first channel emerges as the possibility that the
deterioration İn current account and the expectations thereon might unfavorabiy affect future inflation
through the volatilities they cause in exchange rate. This is not and will not be a strong probability
considering the significant steps taken in the way of enacting a new medium-term program under
preparation with the support of international institutons. Achievements made in the framework ofthe
current program and the gradually lessening vulnerability of the economy to external shocks set the

greatest evidence.

24. The second channel is the correlation between the factors leading to the deterioration in current
account and the inflation dynamics. Exchange rate channel, which is one of the factors in this
correlation, has already been discussed above. Another important factor to be mentioned is the high
rate of growth. The guestion here is: To what extent is the rapid growth a threat to the downward
trend in inflation? In order to be able to give a satisfactory answer to this guestion, İit İs necessary to
make an accurate analysis of the pressure on iİnflaton exerted by the current productlon level.

Considering the rapid rise in private investment expenditures recentiy and the persistent rise in
productivity, it can be asserted that the potentlal production level is increasing. According to the
calculations made within the Central Bank, production level did not reach an extent to threaten the
downward trend in inflation in the first half of 2004. Moreover, output gap, which is defined as the
discrepancy between the potential output level and the actual output, is only one of the variables

determining inflation and not the most important one as well.

25b. Then again, our thoughts with regard to the impact of current account on the inflationary
process should not shadow the fact that we are carefully examining the developments related to the
current account. Current account deficit originating mainly from the machinery-eguipment imports
supports productüvity increase through the contribution of investment goods in potential output and
thus has its share in the prevailing low inflatıon and high growth rates. However, the high level of
deficit, also in the face of changing global liguidity trends increases the fragility of the domestic
economy. For example, the possibility of the Federal Reserve making a more drastic interest rate hike
than expected in the coming days should be perceived as a risk factor at present. To emphasize once
more, in an economy where structural reforms are sustained uninterruptediy and fiscal policy is on
track, such a risk becoming a reality should not be expected to reverse the above-mentioned positive

developments with a long-lasting impact.

26. It may prove useful in the coming period to monitor current account deficit developments in a
thorough manner together with their sub-items and to take “selected measures” aimed at keeping the
increase in consumption goods under control if necessary, without making any compromise in terms
of the fiscal discipline, in case a potential problem is foreseen. Because, part of the recovery in tax
revenues and budget performance occurred in line with the speeding up of economic actüvity. Extra
tax revenues created by business cycles should not be channeled to expenditures, so that the
pressure may be eased on the current account. Beyond all these, for the current account deficit not to
be an obstacle to economic growth in the medium term, structural reforms need to be accelerated
and the guality of financing must be further enhanced. Within this framework, it should be kept in

mind that soclal security and tax reforms will be very significant policy responses.

Inflation

27. The favorable course continued in July as well and the increase in CPI remained at thelevel of
3.3 percent in cumulative terms, in the first seven months of 2004, despite the oil price shock and
exchange rate fluctuations in the recent period. Turkish lira resuming the tendency of appreciation
following the exchange rate fluctuations in April and May was one of the factors restricting the passthrough effect for CPI. Besides, playing significant role in this tendency were the favorable course of
expectations, the slow pace of recovery in the domestic demand except for the durable consumption
goods, the favorable course of food prices, and the continuing producüvity increase in the first half of
the year. Moreover, in line with the productivity increases in the manufacturing industry, unit labor
costs are predicted to continue making a positive contribution to inflation in overall 2004, though not
as much as the last two years. Proceeding with the arrangements for the removal of obstacles to

investments and productdion is a pre-condition in all cases for the continuity of productivity increases.

28. Ithas been underlined several times since the beginning of 2004 that annual CPI figures would
be on decline up untül May, and that they might either assume a standstill or go up from then on, in
connection with the very low price increases same month(s) of last year, all of these to be in line with
forecasts. Actualiy, the annual inflation figures that are entirely backward looking variables did go up
in July, compared to the previous month. Data for this day suggest that annual inflation figures may
also go up İn August as a conseguence of the fluctuations in oil prices and exchange rates, but will

stabilize later on and realize within the end-year target.

29. Certainiy, especlaliy recent oil price movements will have reflections on the general inflation level
via prices of imported goods and production costs. However compared to the past, these impacts are
anticipated to be limited in the short-run. Because, as a conseguence of competitive environment
getting more widespread and domestic demand being kept under control, firms tends to postpone
passing costs on to the prices. Moreover, Central Bank's monetary policy being focused on the
harmony of future inflation with targeted inflation, falling inflatıon and tight fiscal policies of the last
two years alter pricing behavior, influence expectations and help weaken the pass-through effect of
temporary cost fluctuations on inflation. Besides, the formation of the margin owing to the fact that
the increase in consumer prices in the first seven months of the year remained even below the path
consistent with the inflation target show that temporary deviations from the basic trend would not

jeopardize the year-end target.

30. The Central Bank should act with a forward-looking perspective by considering the lagged effects
of monetary policy decisions. As long as tight fiscal policy and incomes policies consistent with the
target are sustained, no clear inflationary pressure is anticipated for the rest of the year. However,
although he belief that inflation target is achievable for 2004 gained strength, it should be taken into
account that there are certain risks for the year 2005. Potential factors and risks that might have an

influence on inflation dynamics in the coming term, and especilaliy in 2005 are as follows:

e - İtis projected that by 2005, neither domestic demand developments, nor unitlabor costs
would provide as much support as they used to provide in the last three years. Domestic
demand started to recover by 2003 and even increased as of the first half of 2004.
Therefore, developments in consumer credits as well as the course of domestic demand

components will continue to be monitored very closely.

e The 8.7 percent of rise in manufacturing industry prices in the last seven months brings
along the risk of an acceleration in the rise in consumer prices in the case of a recovery
in domestic demand. The public prices, which supported the decline in inflation
throughout 2003, exceeded private manufacturing sector prices by 7.6 percentage points
in the first seven months of 2004. The rise in crude oil, main metaland chemical products

prices in international markets due to growth observed in global economy as well as the
climb in exchange rates in the second guarter became the factors underlying this
increase. Meanwhile, the rise in the prices of other public products such as TEKEL
products and sugar played an important role in this rise as well. It is observed that the
rise in public prices is still within the tolerable limits for 2004 inflation. However, opting for
unforeseen tax and price adjustments for the sake of financing budget in the upcoming
period, for which single digit figures are targeted for inflaton, would jeopardize the
inflaton targets. Iherefore, İt is of crucial importance to reiterate the need for reinforcing

the guality of fiscal discipline in the upcoming period.

Unforeseen deviations in energy prices are a risk factor all over the world and Turkey is
no exception. The rise in oil prices is not expected to head down in the near future and
this upward trend is likely to exert pressure on current account deficit as well as on
inflation in the upcoming period. In case the rise in global oil prices continues and budgetfinancing regulirement increases due to exchange rate pressure, making price adjustments
in fuel products and oll will become inevitable. The effects of such increases on inflation in

the rest of 2004 and 2005 will be very closely monitored.

Inflation target-based monetary and fiscal policies that have been implemented for the
last three years, and the Central Bank's clear opinion-sharing with the public about the
course of future inflation trends are playing an important role in molding expectations. At
this point, the economic agents percelive the announced inflatlon target as a strong
reference point. Within this framework, it is expected that inflation expectations would
display no significant deviation from the target in the rest of 2004 provided that necessary
confidence is established in the markets that the program will be strictiy adhered to and

more efforts will be made to make structural reforms.

Rigidity in services sector is relatively persisting. The annual inflation rates in lease
contracts, education and hospital services exceeding the generalinflation trend along with
backward-looking indexation method pose risk to 2005 inflation. It should be bormne in
mind that in the upcoming period when single-digit inflatton figures are be targeted, any
relative price discrepancies owing to a significant deviation in any of the sub-items from

the general trend will be more important than it used to be.

Agricultural prices and food prices have been supporting inflation in 2004. However, the
sectors in guestion are susceptible to weather conditions. Therefore, data pertaining to
price developments in those sectors provide very lİittle information for 2005 inflation and

can play no important role in monetary policy decision-making process.

There are certain factors increasing risk perceptions in financial markets, which are: The
level of foreign trade deficit is high due to increased economic activity and this in turn
increases sensitivity; the Federal Reserve raised interest rates faster than expected: the

necessary decisions reguired for the continuation of the program were delayed and there
is the probability that the uncertaintües pertaining to the EU accession negotilatlons might
turn negative. Undoubtediy, even if the mentioned risks become facts, the fluctuations
that might emerge subseguentiy would be weaker and their effect on prices would be
more limited compared to the pre-2001 period, provided the monetary and fiscal discipline
is maintained and permanent achievements are made about structural reforms. However,
it should be borne in mind that under given conditions, developments in other economies

and the signals to be given would be very important in the short-run.

31. Conseguentiy, although annual inflation rate is likely to increase in the upcoming months, taking
into account the fact that the cumulative inflation rates became rather low in the past 7 months, it can
be asserted that chances of surpassing the inflation target is still low unless there emerge some
exogenous shocks. Rise in foreign demand, slowdown in the decline in unit costs, relative recovery in
domestic consumption expenditures, high ratio of capacity utilizatton and accelerated public price
increases point out to the fact that struggle with inflation will be even harder in 2005. Therefore,
sustaining fiscal discipline as well as implementing public wages and revenues policies that are
consistent with the inflation target will continue to be a prereguisite for carrying on with struggle with

inflatıon.

32. Moreover, İt is critical to put greater effort to making arrangements intended to remove all kinds
of obstacles before investment and production to ensure sustainability of the rise in production in the
medium and short run, which is important for making sure that stable growth and decline in inflation
can continue. İt is welcomed that the efforts already initated and the steps taken about the reforms
pertaining to public administration, social security and financial sector. However, itshould be borne in
mind that maintaining what has been achieved in strengthening economic fundamentals and reducing
vulnerabilities in the last three years will only be possible provided the structural transformation is

completed.
Survey

lons

to CBRT Expectat

Accordi

lons

Expectat

ion

Inflat

Figure 5

2003-2004

End-year Inflation Expectations and Inflation Target

32

28

24

20

16

—— Year end Inflation Expectations

12

— Inflation Target

2004

2003

Inflation Expectations for the Next 12 Months

28

2004

2003

Source: CBRT Expectations Survey
