 
     STATE INSTITUTE OF STATISTICS                                                                 CENTRAL BANK  
 
 1  
 
 
 
 
JOINT PRESS RELEASE    
BY THE STATE INSTITUTE OF STATISTICS  
and 
 THE CENTRAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY  
CONSUMER TENDENCY SURVEY  
 
 
The State Institute of Statistics  and the Central Bank Turkey  have concluded the 
preparatory works for the “Cons umer Tendency Survey” intended to evaluate consumers’ consumption 
behavior and expectations and to measure their tendencies and expectations about the economic 
situation. As of March 2004, the results of the survey will be announced on the website of each institution on the 
first working day following the 21st of every month at 10:00 am.   
As consumers make their consumption decisions by taking into account of the current and future 
course of general economy and their personal financial standing, the data pe rtaining to consumer 
tendency and expectations become more important for monitoring economic developments and making projections. Consumer tendency surveys facilitate determining consumer tendencies and expectations about certain issues. The consumer confi dence indexes , which are calculated by using survey 
results, are widely used as indicators reflecting the consumers’ general perceptions formed in the light of their assessments and expectations.                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
The pilot study of the Consumer Tenden cy Survey, which is conducted by the State Institute of 
Statistics and the Central Bank of Turkey, was launched In April 2003. The survey is conducted simultaneously with the Household Labor Force Survey. The sample group, which is formed by 
selecting 2000  persons from among the respondents of the Household Labor Force Survey conducted 
22 March 2004  
 
  
     STATE INSTITUTE OF STATISTICS                                                                 CENTRAL BANK  
 
 2 according to age, employment conditions and income categories, represents the Turkish population 
older than 15 years of age, who have an income from an economic activity.  
The Consumer Tendency Survey comprises questions about participants’ opinions and 
expectations about their personal financial standing and general economic course as well as their spending plans and price expectations. During the pilot period, the performanc es of the questions have 
been tested and necessary modifications have been made in the questions by the experts from the State Institute of Statistics and the Central Bank of Turkey. The detailed results of the Consumer Confidence Index and the following 15 questions will be announced monthly as of March 2004. The Consumer Confidence Index, which is calculated according to the specified method and question scope, includes five questions (questions 1, 2, 4, 5 and 7) concerning personal financial standing and  general 
course of economy. Throughout the pilot study period, it was observed that the index moved in line 
with various macroeconomic indicators and reflected the current developments in the economy.         
CONSUMER TENDENCY SU RVEY QUESTIONS  
1. Compared to the past 6 months, how is your purchasing power at the moment?  
2. How do you think your purchasing power will change over the next 6 months?  
3. Compared to the past 3 months, how do you assess Turkey’s current general economic 
situation?  
4. How do you expect Turkey ’s general economic situation will change over the next 3 
months?  
5. How do you think job opportunities in Turkey will change over the next 6 months?  
6. Compared to the past 3 months, how do you think your or your household’s spending on 
semi-durable consumer go ods (clothes, shoes, kitchen equipment, etc.) will change over the 
next 3 months?  
7. Do you think that now is the right time for people to buy durable consumer goods like 
refrigerators, televisions or furniture?  
8. How likely are you or your household to buy du rable consumer goods like refrigerator, 
television or furniture over the next 6 months?  
9. How likely are you or your household to buy a car over the next 6 months?  
10. How likely are you or your household to buy or build a house (for you, for anyone from your family, to rent, for holiday) over the next 12 months?   
     STATE INSTITUTE OF STATISTICS                                                                 CENTRAL BANK  
 
 3 11. How likely are you to spend on home improvements or renovations (heating system, 
painting, kitchen -bathroom repairs, etc. - except spending on little amount of purchases) 
over the next 12 months?  
12. How like ly are you or your household to borrow money (consumer credits or other 
borrowings) to finance your consumption over the next 3 months?   
13. In view of the general economic situation, do you think now is the right time to make savings? (TL, foreign currency, gold, deposits, other financial investment instruments) 
14. How likely are you to save (TL, foreign currency, gold, deposit, other financial investment instruments) over the next 6 months?  
15. Compared to the current figures, how do you think prices will change ov er the next 12 
months?     
 