No: 2004-6
30 January 2004

THE CBRT PRESS RELEASE

A)

FOREIGN

EXCHANGE

BUYING

AUCTION

PROGRAM

FOR

FEBRUARY 2004

Considering that strong reserve position would boost the market’s confidence in the
current program and observing the excess foreign exchange supply, the Central Bank of
Turkey (CBRT) decided to resume daily foreign exchange buying auctions on 23 January
2004. The CBRT bought USD 286 million in total during the auctions held between 23 and
30 January 2004.
In this framework, the CBRT has decided to announce daily foreign exchange buying
auctions for February as well. The daily amount of foreign exchange buying auction and the
amount of the optional selling will be USD 30 million. Therefore, the maximum daily auction
can amount to USD 60 million. Accordingly, foreign exchange buying auctions are to be held
on 16 working days in February, except for the holiday period for the Feast of the Sacrifice
between 2 and 4 February, and 16 February, which is public holiday in USA, and it is planned
that the maximum amount to be bought would be USD 960 million.
As was announced by previous press releases, the CBRT may, with a prior notice,
suspend the auctions before the end of the period in the cases where the depth of foreign
exchange market is lost and excessive volatility is observed in exchange rates due to an
exogenous shock or unpredictable developments. As usual, the CBRT will continue to closely
monitor the volatility in exchange rates and will directly intervene in the market in case of an
excessive volatility in both directions.

B) TURKISH LIRA DEPOSIT BUYING AUCTIONS PROGRAM FOR
FEBRUARY 2004

The Central Bank will continue to hold Turkish lira deposit buying auctions with a
standard two and four-week maturity in February 2004, as a supplement to its existing
instruments with the aim of enhancing the effectiveness of its efforts to sterilize the excess
Turkish lira liquidity in the system.
As in January 2004, the Turkish lira deposit buying auctions with a standard two-week
maturity will be held on Mondays, and those with a standard four-week maturity will be held
on Wednesdays and Fridays in February 2004. There will be no upper limit at each auction.

