No: 2005-25
June 20, 2005

PRESS RELEASE
ON
INTEREST RATES TO BE APPLIED ON FOREIGN
EXCHANGE DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS WITH CREDIT LETTERS
AND SUPER FX ACCOUNTS
The interest rates applicable to the foreign exchange deposit accounts with credit letters and
super FX-accounts have been revised according to the amendment made to our Bank’s Circular
No: I/M.

New Interest Rates for Foreign Exchange Deposit Accounts with Credit
Letters:
The annual interest rate applicable to Swiss franc-denominated accounts for one-year maturity
is lowered to 0.75 percent from 1 percent, and to 0.75 percent from 1 percent for two-year
maturity.
The annual interest rate applicable to UK pound-denominated accounts for one-year maturity
is lowered to 4 percent from 4.50 percent and 4 percent from 4.75 percent or two year maturity.
Interest rates applicable to Euro-denominated and USD-denominated accounts with credit
letters remain the same.
Accordingly; annual interest rates remain unchanged as 2.5 percent for one-year maturity, and
2.75 percent for two-year maturity in Euro-denominated accounts; as 2.25 percent for one-year
maturity and 2.75 percent for two-year maturity in USD-denominated accounts.
New Interest Rates for Super FX Deposit Accounts:
The annual interest rate applicable to Euro-denominated accounts is lowered to 3.50 percent
from 3.75 percent for two-year maturity, and to 4 percent from 4.25 percent for three-year
maturity.
Annual interest rates for Euro-denominated accounts with one-year maturity and US dollardenominated accounts with one, two, three maturity remain the same.
Accordingly, the interest rate applicable to Euro-denominated accounts is 3 percent for oneyear maturity; and for USD-denominated accounts, it remains 3 percent for one-year maturity;
3.75 percent for two-year maturity and 4.5 percent for three-year maturity.
.

Meanwhile, the 0.25 percent interest rate applied to the amount withdrawn before the maturity
date remains unchanged for Super FX Deposit Accounts and for Foreign Exchange Deposit
Accounts with Credit Letters.
The new interest rates shall take effect as of June 20th, 2005.

