No: 2005-45      December 5, 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GENERAL FRAMEWORK OF INFLATION TARGETING 
REGIME and MONETARY AND EXCHANGE RATE POLICY 
FOR 2006 
 
 
 
Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey 
DECEMBER 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
  1TRANSITION TO INFLATION TARGETING REGIME 
Introduction 
1. Inflation targeting is a successful monetary policy regime im plemented not only in 
developed but also developing countries. The number of countries which have 
adopted inflation targeting have been increasing steadily. The Cent ral Bank of the 
Republic of Turkey (Central Bank) emphasized in its announcement of earl y 2002 
pertaining to the general framework of monetary policy that the fi nal target of 
monetary policy was the adoption of inflation targeting regime, but as  the 
reliability of the regime would suffer in case this adoption was made prematurely – 
without satisfying the necessary pre-conditions – first there wil l be a waiting 
period to allow the factors that restrict the efficiency of mone tary policy to 
weaken. It was also pointed out in the same announcement that “implici t inflation 
targeting” would be implemented until the adoption of the inflation-tar geting 
regime. In line with this, inflation targets were set jointl y with the government. 
While utilizing short-term interest rates efficiently in the  fight against inflation, 
base money was set as an additional anchor with a view to increasi ng the reliability 
of inflation targets. This policy, supported by fiscal discipline, ongoing structural 
arrangements and the progress made towards Central Bank independence,  paved 
the way for significant gains on the road to price stability.  
2. In time, harmonization with the floating exchange rate regime incr eased and 
considerable progress was made in the formation of a suitable envir onment for the 
transition to an inflation targeting regime: all inflation targe ts were met, confidence 
was heightened and inflation expectations converged with the targets.  Today, 
inflation is at its lowest in thirty years. While debates on t he sustainability of 
public debt stock used to be at the top of the economic agenda in the past,  this is no 
longer the case. Worries pertaining to the continuity of fiscal di scipline have eased 
considerably. Financial markets started to become deeper, and the f inancial sector 
has become less fragile.  
3. Progress made towards economic stability started the reverse- dollarization process, 
and although it was interrupted from time to time and more progress is necessary, 
the weight of Turkish lira denominated investments began to increase  in portfolio 
preferences.   24. In the same time-span, six zeros were dropped from the Turkish lira  and New 
Turkish Lira (YTL) was adopted. This step, we refer to as monet ary reform, was a 
demonstration of our trust in the permanent nature of the gains achieve d.  
5. Following the agreement with the IMF, the announcement of the medium- term 
program and the start of the negotiation process with the European Union for full 
membership, the predictability of fundamental macroeconomic variables  further 
increased.  
6. During the period 2001-2005, very significant steps were taken pertaini ng to the 
improvement of the institutional infrastructure of monetary policy, and this is 
another pre-condition for the transition to the inflation-targeting reg ime. During 
this process, the Central Bank rendered its institutional framewor k more efficient, 
defined its communications policy in a more transparent way, expanded i ts 
information set and improved its inflation forecast methods. Besides  these factors, 
significant progress was made during this time in the area of C entral Bank 
independence, pertaining to its practice. This development strengthene d 
expectations that the chronic inflationary process will not return.  
7. All these developments pointed to the fact that the pre-conditions of t he inflation-
targeting regime had, to a large extent, been met and the appropri ate time was 
approaching. The Central Bank did not adopt the regime in 2005 due not only to 
the changes made by the Turkish Statistics Agency in the price i ndices released by 
the agency, but also to the monetary reform that took place. Yet, the Central Bank 
announced that this was the final preparation period for the transition t o the 
inflation-targeting regime. Steps taken in this preparation period for further 
institutionalization of monetary policy brought the practice of monetar y policy 
strategy one step closer to the inflation-targeting regime. I n the said period, 
Monetary Policy Committee meetings began to be held at pre-set and pre-
announced dates and times, and interest rate decisions – taking into ac count the 
deliberations made at the meetings - began to be made public at 9 a. m., the next 
day. Such meetings were followed by the prompt release of a text outlining the 
rationale behind the decisions as well as providing the opinions of the m embers of 
the Monetary Policy Committee. These texts not only justify the immediate 
decisions but also provide signals for the future course of interest rate decisions. In 
addition, during the same period the organizational structure of the ins titution was  3renewed and the terms of reference pertaining to monetary policy w ere clarified. 
As a result, during the last four years, and especially during t he last year, the 
predictability of monetary policy evidently increased, and signifi cant 
developments took place pertaining to institutional infrastructure and t ransparency.  
8. The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey will begin to practice t he regime of 
inflation targeting, within the framework of the institutionalizat ion process of 
monetary policy in 2006. Together with this regime, it is planned to move towards 
the process of “price stability” from the “disinflation” process of recent years. 
Within this context, there will be increased transparency and account ability in the 
upcoming period, in terms of inflation targets and the policies for r eaching these 
targets, within the general framework of monetary policy. This press release 
should be perceived as a main policy text for the framework of the i nflation-
targeting regime.  
THE GENERAL DEFINITION OF INFLATION TARGETING REGIM E 
9. The primary objective and main priority of central banks is to achi eve and 
maintain price stability. As for inflation targeting, it is a monetary policy strategy, 
becoming more widely used with the aim of achieving price stabili ty. Although 
there are various definitions in academic literature, practice s point to two main 
factors differentiating the inflation targeting regime from ot her regimes:  
i. The central banks implementing an inflation-targeting regime announce their 
inflation targets numerically, commit themselves to achieving  these targets 
and are accountable to the public in case targets are not attained.   
ii. As monetary policy decisions affect on the economy with a tim e lag, central 
banks control future inflation rather than current inflation. With this aim, 
they develop inflation forecasts periodically and make them public. T hat is 
why the inflation-targeting regime is also frequently called “ inflation forecast 
targeting”. Along the same lines, the consistency of the foreca sts with the 
inflation target and the risk of deviating from the target are e xplained to the 
public.  
10. The monetary policy implemented in Turkey has gradually approached the 
inflation-targeting regime. Following the new steps to be taken i n 2006 regarding  4transparency and accountability, the current monetary policy of that t ime will from 
then on be described as the inflation-targeting regime. Analysis of other countries, 
as well as Turkey’s past experiences suggest that the inflati on targeting regime is 
not an end in terms of monetary policy, but on the contrary, a component of  an 
uninterrupted “evolution” process. Certainly, this evolution process holds  true for 
not only the policy makers, but also for all the other economic units. Enhanced 
mutual interaction and information sharing with the public during this proc ess will 
render the regime more functional and efficient. In line with this , the main items on 
the agenda for the Central Bank in the upcoming period will be to raise  the level of 
transparency, accountability and predictability. The fundamentals of monetary 
policy in the coming period are summarized below. 
THE GENERAL FRAMEWORK OF INFLATION TARGETING REGIME IN 
TURKEY 
11. The Central Bank has been working on the inflation-targeting regime s ince the 
year 2000. The experiences of more than 20 - developed or developing - countr ies 
implementing the inflation targeting regime were used while cons tructing the main 
framework of the regime for Turkey. The country examples showed that , there is 
no system, which is “the unique and the best for all countries”. Ther efore, it has 
been taken into consideration that a model specific to Turkey needs to be  formed 
while constructing the general structure within the framework of a n inflation-
targeting regime.  
Inflation Target and the Period of Targeting 
12. Owing to the advantage of being easily understood by the public, as we ll as its 
communication advantage, the inflation target was set as “a point  target”. As it is 
an indicator easily followed by all members of society and an eff ective way of 
accurately measuring the cost of daily life, the Consumer Pric e Index was the 
preferred means of defining the inflation target. Along these line s, the target 
variable is the end-year rate of inflation calculated by the annua l percentage 
change of the Consumer Price Index with the base year 2003. Bearing i n mind the 
transition from 2006 onwards to a three-year budget practice, the announce ment of 
a three-year target path is believed to increase the internal  consistency of inflation 
targets and their harmony with other macroeconomic projections. There fore,  5during this initial stage of the inflation-targeting regime, t argets are announced for 
a three-year period. In harmony with the Pre-Accession Economic Pr ogram and 
three-year budget plans, the end-year targets for 2006, 2007 and 2008 are s et as 5 
percent, 4 percent and 4 percent, respectively. The target for e nd-2009 will be 
announced in 2006.  
Interpretation of the Target  
13. End-year inflation targets for the period of 2002-2005 were announced within t he 
framework of implicit inflation targeting, and inflation was rea lized below the 
targets for the first three years in a row. It is predicte d that the realization for 2005 
will most probably be below the target as well. Under normal condit ions where 
inflation has stabilized at low levels, it can be considered as unfavorable for 
inflation to remain systematically below the target. However , as the primary 
objective while moving from the chronic inflation environment to sing le-digit 
figures in the 2001-2005 period was to bring down the high level of inflation,  
remaining below the target did not affect expectations adversely.  On the contrary, 
it bolstered perceptions that the disinflation process would continue. He nce, in this 
period, the fact that inflation was below the targets was conside red to be a more 
acceptable situation compared to inflation realizing above the targ ets. Within this 
context, the targets announced by the Central Bank were implicitly perceived as 
the “upper limit”. However, it is inevitable that this situat ion will change in the 
coming years. This is due to the fact that in economies where inf lation has 
stabilized, monetary policy is in a position to aim for the coherenc e between 
inflation and the targets, rather than inflation realizing below t he targets. Along 
these lines, in the process of the inflation-targeting regime, the Central Bank will 
from now on assess upward or downward deviations from the target on equal  
footing. This also means that an explanation will be made to the public  in both 
substantial upward and downward deviation of inflation from the target. 
 
  
Deviation from the Target and Accountability 
14.  Measured by the Consumer Price Index, which is a comprehensive index,  the 
course of inflation may show fluctuations arising from the factors outside the  6control of monetary policy. Factors such as developments in oil price s, changes in 
international liquidity conditions and global risk perceptions, indirect t ax and 
public price adjustments, and unforeseen movements in the prices of unproc essed 
food may lead to volatilities in inflation from time to time. C onsidering the data 
and model uncertainty in the economy in addition to the factors mentioned a bove, 
it is obvious that inflation realization is quite unlikely to be exac tly the same figure 
as the point target That is why it is not possible for the Centra l Bank to ensure that 
inflation will not make even the slightest deviation from the point targets.  
15. However, this does not stand for the lack of accountability. In case  of a significant 
deviation from the target in any period, the Central Bank shall expl ain the reasons 
behind the said development to the public in its reports, in the framew ork of the 
inflation-targeting regime. In this context, the Central Bank wi ll continuously be 
obliged to account for its actions to the public through the publication of i ts 
reports. Nevertheless, it is of paramount importance that the Ce ntral Bank 
establishes a separate mechanism, which will explain the situa tion to the public in 
cases where inflation realizations display an excessive deviat ion from the target. 
Thus, the provision in Article 42 of the Central Bank Law states t hat “The Bank 
shall submit information to the Government in writing and inform the p ublic 
disclosing the reasons of incapability to achieve the determined ta rgets in due time 
or the occurrence of the possibility of not achieving such targets a nd the measures 
to be taken thereof.” As the said article provides accountability,  it shall be 
implemented with utmost care in the framework of the inflation-ta rgeting regime.  
16. At this point, the main question to be answered is how to establish thi s mechanism. 
As it is stated explicitly in paragraph 14, the probability of achie ving the point 
target is almost zero. In this case, will the accountability  principle also apply to a 
small deviation, which can be defined in decimal or even in percenta ge points? 
How big should a deviation be in order to require such an explanation?  It is clear 
that size matters however the perception of size is much more i mportant. 
Determination of the size of the deviation stands for the expression of an 
“uncertainty band” per se. The critical point is that this band should not be 
perceived as a band for the inflation target.   717.  Building a band around the target is an implementation preferred by m ost of the 
central banks that adopted inflation targeting and announced a point target . 1 The 
fact that central banks build a band around the point target does not indica te a slack 
monetary policy. It should be emphasized once more that the uncertainty  band 
should not be perceived as any type of target. It is only an indicat or for the bi-
directional and “excessive deviation” thresholds of the band target, which was 
announced for 2006, and an element that facilitates the communication polic y of 
the Central Bank. In the overall scenario in which big exogenous shocks do not 
occur, the public should understand clearly that the aim of the Central  Bank is to 
be as close to the point target as possible and therefore, the Bank will consider 
upward and downward deviations from the 5 percent-target in the same m anner. 
Furthermore, it should be noted by the economic agents that the uncertai nty band is 
likely to shrink as a result of further approaching price stability  in the upcoming 
years.  
18. In light of the statements above, the “uncertainty band” for 2006 is se t as 2-
percentage point in both directions. The inflation path consistent with t he end-year 
target and the uncertainty bands around the path are shown below. In case  figures 
go outside the band, the Central Bank shall submit a separate report to the 
Government disclosing the reasons of the incident and the measures to be  taken 
thereof and share this report with the public.  
TABLE 1. INFLATION PATH CONSISTENT WITH THE END-YEAR  TARGET 
AND THE UNCERTAINTY BAND 
 March  
2006  
 June  
2006  September  
2006  December  
2006  
 Uncertainty Band (upper 
limit)  9.4 8.5 7.8 7 
 
Path Consistent with 
the Target  
 7.4 6.5 5.8 5 
Uncertainty Band (lower 
limit)  5.4 4.5 3.8 3 
 
                                                
1 International Monetary Fund, 2005, “Does Inflation  Targeting Work In Emerging Markets?”, World Econom ic 
Outlook, 4, Part 4, p.161-186, September Washington  DC.  
  8Adoption of a Medium-Term Perspective 
19. There is a close relation between building an uncertainty band and a “ medium-
term perspective”. In order to minimize macroeconomic fluctuations  while 
struggling against the exogenous shocks that increase or decrease i nflation 
remarkably, we need an “uncertainty band” around the point target to se rve as a 
reference. Rather than temporary fluctuations in inflation, what m atters to the 
Central Bank in the medium-term is that inflation becomes 5 percent  in one year 
and 4 percent in two years by displaying a gradual decline and achieves  a degree of 
stability. It should be noted that a medium-term inflation target stands out in such 
an implementation. In a medium-term perspective, the Central Ba nk does not 
instantly react to the temporary impacts of large exogenous shocks on inflation, but 
spread out the policy reactions over a period of time by putting emphas is on 
medium-term targets. In this context, the Central Bank will cl early explain to the 
public how a shock that threatens the inflation target is handled (such as the 
evaluation of temporary or permanent features of a shock). In the fr amework of 
Article 42 of the Law mentioned in paragraph 15, the Central Bank wil l not only 
implement policies aimed at reconvergence to the target but also notify the 
political authority of the steps to be taken and inform the public of the  amount of 
time needed for converging to the target again.  
20. For instance, it is a widely accepted idea that central banks s hould not have a 
reaction to the primary effects of an increase in oil prices. However, as the 
implementation of this idea requires certain flexibility, an uncer tainty band should 
be built around the target.  
21. Let us explain this matter with an example: In a scenario in whi ch oil prices rise by 
USD 100 per barrel and maintain their high trend throughout 2006, their prima ry 
impacts on inflation might reach 3 or 4 points and naturally, the Centr al Bank 
would let the end-2006 inflation exceed the 5-percent target. In case t he Central 
Bank strived to reach the 5-percent target in 2006 in spite of the suppos ed increase 
in oil prices, the Bank might be obliged to increase interests si gnificantly and 
therefore, cause a negative impact on social welfare by crea ting a contraction in 
economic activity. Instead of this, the Central Bank in the supposed situation, 
would allow the deviation from the 2006 target, but pledge to decrease the inflation 
to 4 percent in 2007 in order to prevent secondary effects and keep expectat ions  9under control. A similar action plan could be followed against probable 
developments such as changes in international liquidity conditions, adjust ments in 
indirect taxes and public prices, pricing differentiations of instit utions stemming 
from structural adjustments and sudden movements in agricultural product  prices.  
22. The important point here is that in the periods where inflation deviat es from the 
target, the Central Bank clearly explains the reasons for the de viation to the public 
and informs them  of the timing of re-convergence to the target and the relevant 
monetary policy. There is no doubt that the said time band may differ  according to 
the type and size of shocks. As various shocks may have different i mpacts on 
inflation according to timing and periods, in case of a significant di version from 
the target, the re-convergence period shall be announced after the oc currence of the 
shocks and the determination of their sources.  
Special CPI Aggregates  
23. The CPI occasionally displays unpredictable changes as a result of  fluctuations in 
energy, unprocessed food and public prices and in indirect taxes. Therefor e, the 
CPI inflation, which is taken as the target criteria in the f ramework of the inflation-
targeting regime, may occasionally be affected by factors t hat are beyond the 
control of monetary policy. For this reason, in order to achieve a be tter 
understanding of the main inflation trend, Special CPI Aggregates (SCA) will 
continue to be a part of the forward-looking inflation analysis of the C entral Bank 
and its communication policy. As the shocks affecting inflation may differ 
according to their periods, there is a very small probability tha t a sole “core 
inflation” indicator excludes all the factors that are outside the control of monetary 
policy. Therefore, instead of considering a single so-called core indicator, more 
than one indicator is used in the differentiation of various exogenous shocks . There 
is no doubt that some of the said indicators may stand out in the future.  However, 
for now, core inflation it is not likely to be defined with a single  indicator. In this 
process, the Central Bank will openly inform the public of the type of  relevant 
indicator and the degree of its importance. Moreover, after reachi ng a satisfactory 
number of observations, new indices can be compiled based on different 
techniques and SCA definitions can be updated according to the changing 
economic conditions.  
  10  
Conditions for Changing Targets 
24. A pre-announced inflation target shall only change in the event that v ery sharp and 
long-term deviations from the target are expected or medium-term  targets no 
longer make sense due to factors beyond the control of monetary policy. At this 
point, a new target will be set with the Government with respec t to the Law.  
25. Temporary shocks can change inflation forecasts rather than inflati on targets. For 
instance, even though a one-off adjustment in indirect taxes diverts inflation from 
the targets, a change in the target will be out of the question due  to its limited 
effect on one-year ahead inflation forecasts. Instead, the short-t erm forecasts will 
be changed. In this case, the points of reference to be used by economic  agents will 
be inflation forecasts for the short term and the inflation target  for the medium 
term. In conclusion, it is fundamental in the upcoming period that the t argets do 
not change except in cases of extraordinary developments.  
Public Sector’s Role in the Inflation Targeting Regime 
26. Sound monetary policy is a necessary condition on the way towards price stability, 
but not sufficient. In order to attain price stability, the continuit y of fiscal 
discipline should be maintained in the upcoming years as in past years . In Turkey, 
fiscal discipline has the potential to affect the inflation-tar geting regime through 
four channels. The first channel comprises long-term expectations. F urther 
enhancement of fiscal discipline through its continuity will increase  the 
effectiveness and predictability of monetary policy by extending the bor rowing 
maturities and reducing the risk premium and the volatilities in ri sk premiums and 
contribute to the credibility of the inflation targeting regime.  
27. The second channel works through the prices of goods and services produced by 
the public sector itself. Naturally, the consistency between the  prices of goods and 
services produced by the public sector and inflation targets is cruc ial for attaining 
price stability.  
28. The third channel works through the incomes policy of the public sector. O ne of 
the main determinants of the expectations for price and wage inflat ion in Turkey 
are the wage increases made by the public sector to its own employ ees. In this  11 context, the consistent trend of the incomes policy with the inflation target is a sine 
qua non for the success of the inflation-targeting regime.  
29. The fourth channel is the direct spending channel. The public sector’s di rect 
purchases of goods and services are reflected on inflation via tota l demand.  The 
powerful position of these channels indicates the critical importance  of the 
continuity of fiscal discipline in a period where the memories of c hronic inflation 
are still fresh. In conclusion, continuity of fiscal discipline and c onsistent 
implementation of fiscal policies with targets are fundamentals  in the success of 
the inflation-targeting regime.  
Inflation Targeting Regime and IMF Conditionality   
30. With the adoption of the inflation-targeting regime at the beginning of  2006, in the 
scope of “IMF Program Requirements”, Net International Reserve s will continue 
to be performance criteria, however performance criteria for M oney Base and the 
indicative target for Net Domestic Assets will be replace d with the “inflation 
consultation criteria”. To this end, from 2006 onwards, a path will be established 
consistently with the end-year target at the beginning of every y ear and this path 
will be used for the revisions made with the IMF within the fram ework of the 
program. As of the end of 2005, the inflation figures consistent with t he end-year 
target are calculated for end-March, June, September and Decembe r; and the 
figures, which are set out in paragraph 18, appeared in the Letter of Intent.  
31. Graph 1 shows the quarterly path of inflation consistent with the end-y ear target of 
2006, which was prepared to be used in reviews within the framework of the 
agreement signed with the IMF. The specified path has been formed by taking into 
account factors such as base effect and seasonality. The path for 2007 is going to 
be formed at the end of 2006.   12 32. As seen in Graph 1, revision criteria around the target-consistent  path are 
established. For each quarterly period, if inflation remains below or above the 
target-consistent path by one or more points, there will be negotiat ions with IMF 
staff in each review. In case of such a development, the Centra l Bank will inform 
the public of the causes of the deviation via the issue of periodical  reports. 
33. If inflation falls below or exceeds the target-consistent path by two or more points, 
since such a fall or rise will be considered as a violation of t he program 
conditionality, the Bank will announce the measures to be taken within the 
principles of the program. These measures will also serve the principle mentioned 
above in the part concerning accountability, which reads: “In case of a two-point 
deviation in the target-consistent path in either direction, the Ce ntral Bank will 
prepare a separate document that will serve to inform the public of  the causes and 
measures to be taken, and also provide the Government with a writte n statement”. 
The public announcement to be made in case of a likely violation of the pr ogram 
conditionality will also be presented to the IMF and thus a certain level of 
transparency will have been established.  GRAPH 1. PROGRAM CONDITIONALITY: INFLATION PATH CON SISTENT WITH 
THE END-YEAR TARGET*   
012345678910 
03.06 06.06 09.06 12.06 End-year 
Target: 5% 
 
* Inner band: +/- 1 percentage point 
   Outer band: +/- 2 percentage points  
  
  13 34. There is a critical point that needs special emphasis: The progr am conditionality 
outlined above does not mean that monetary policy will focus on quarterl y periods. 
The path designed within the framework of the program will have rel ative 
significance in evaluating the consistency between the yearly c ourse of inflation 
and targets, and the Central Bank will maintain its medium-term  perspective in 
making monetary policy decisions. For instance, if it is anticipa ted in January 2006 
that a significant deviation from the target-consistent path wil l be observed in 
March, this anticipation will be shared with the public, while monet ary policy will 
not react as long as the inflation outlook is consistent with medium-t erm targets.  
Inflation Report and Forecasts  
35. With the transition to the inflation-targeting regime, the quarte rly issued Inflation 
Report will be the main communication instrument of monetary policy. In 2006 
dates of issue of the Report have been determined as the last wee ks of January, 
April, July and October. The first issue of the Report will be r eleased at the end of 
January 2006. The Monetary Policy Report, which has been issued quarterl y, will 
not be issued in the new period.  
36. In the Inflation Report, inflation and general macroeconomic development s will be 
discussed in depth. The greatest change in the Report will be the i nclusion of the 
inflation forecasts of the Central Bank. In case of a change in t he forecasts of a 
previous Report, the new Report will provide information explaining why upda ted 
forecasts differ from those of the previous period. Moreover, the R eport will also 
contain signals of likely future policies along with a general ev aluation of the 
factors influencing inflation. In this way, a significant step wi ll have been taken 
towards ensuring transparency and accountability stipulated by the infl ation-
targeting regime.  
37. There is no doubt that the process of forming monetary policy and infla tion 
forecasts involves many uncertainties due to exogenous shocks or the cont inuous 
transformation process in the economy. The said uncertainties apply t o all 
economies in the world but are much higher in economies such as Turkey t hat 
undergo a structural transformation. It is inevitable that all t hese likely shocks and 
uncertainties will influence inflation forecasts. In this context,  it is extremely 
important that the public becomes aware that forecasts reflect the stance the  14 Central Bank takes about inflation during the issue period of the Report.  Therefore, 
inflation forecasts may change in line with unexpected developments t hat can 
emerge during the time between the two reports as well as wit h any new 
information acquired. What is more noteworthy here than the change in for ecasts 
itself is that causes of the change will be clearly explained to the public through the 
Inflation Report. In other words, the Central Bank will always be liable to be called 
to account. 
Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting  
38. Along with the Inflation Report, minutes of the Monetary Policy Comm ittee 
meeting will also be a significant instrument of communications pol icy in the 
inflation-targeting regime. The Inflation and Outlook Report, which ha s served a 
similar purpose so far, will be replaced with a dual reporting sy stem: Immediately 
after the monetary policy decision is made, a brief report on the decision and its 
rationale will be issued. The other report summarizing the evalua tions of the 
Monetary Policy Committee and its stance about the inflation outlook w ill be 
issued within five working days following the meeting.  
Other Instruments of Communication  
39. Press conferences and presentations will constitute another signifi cant instrument 
to be used in the context of the communications policy in the inflation-t argeting 
regime. The Central Bank will share the general framework of the inflation-
targeting regime with the public through presentations it will gi ve in universities 
and non-governmental organizations from time to time. On the date of r elease of 
the Inflation Report in January 2006, the content of the Report will be out lined in a 
press conference. Every succeeding quarter, the main message of the Inflation 
Report will be conveyed to the public once again in a press conference .  
40. Technical reports issued by the Central Bank, notes that would enable better 
perception of the transmission mechanism and presentations about the met hods 
used in inflation forecasts will form another pillar of the communic ations policy. A 
forecasting and policy analysis system has already been developed within the 
Central Bank in order to support monetary policy decisions. However, t he Central 
Bank will not rely on a single model at this stage. The Bank beli eves that due to  15 uncertainties in the functioning of the transmission mechanism and the r apidly 
changing structure of the economy, it would not be reasonable to stick t o a single 
model and it is important in monetary policy decisions that various m odels with 
various assumptions are evaluated together in light of the views of  specialists. 
Academic literature and central banking experiences are also in c onsensus on the 
above-mentioned views. For this reason, no specific model will be put  forward at 
this stage. As a matter of fact, many developing countries li ke the Czech Republic, 
Poland and Brazil did not develop any models during the first years of inflation 
targeting, either. 2  
41. So far, the Central Bank has at times shared its views about t he functioning of the 
economy with the public through various presentations, reports and working 
papers. Although it has become clearer compared to previous periods, t he 
transmission mechanism in Turkey still harbors a significant lev el of uncertainty 
like other country examples. Nevertheless, the Central Bank has t o share its 
economic views with the public as a necessity for transparency pri nciple. In this 
respect, the Central Bank will continue to share its views wit h the public about the 
effects of monetary policy on inflation through reports and presentations.  In 
addition, studies in this direction will continue at an accelerated pace and 
information as to how inflation forecasts are made within the Centr al Bank will be 
shared with the public in stages. 
42. It is of critical importance that the public properly follows and e valuates the 
reports and other documents issued by the Central Bank, particularly a fter the 
transition to the inflation-targeting regime in 2006. An example wil l be helpful 
here: Following the announcement of inflation figures for October 2005, som e 
remarks were made by the public claiming that “the Central Bank acted more 
cautiously in October since inflation figures were above the expect ed level”. In 
order to increase the effectiveness of economic policies, the shor t-term point of 
view underlying such remarks should be abandoned as soon as possible and our 
reports should be followed closely. As a matter of fact, the prec eding Inflation and 
Outlook Report had anticipated there would be high price increases in Oc tober. For 
this reason, this development was not taken as a new and significant  piece of 
                                                
2 Schaechter Andrea, Mark R. Stone, and Mark Zelmer (2000): “Adopting Inflation Targeting: Practical Is sues 
for Emerging Market Countries”, IMF Occasional Pape r, No 202  16 information in the monetary policy decision made in November. Factors that affect 
the level of the Central Bank’s cautiousness are projections about the  consistency 
between targets and the outlook of inflation in the medium-term, rathe r than 
seasonal price increases in certain goods in any month. 
Decision-Making Process  
43. After the transition to an inflation-targeting regime, the Monet ary Policy 
Committee will assume a “decision maker” role instead of an “a dvisor” role. 
Unless an emergency arises, the Monetary Policy Committee wi ll continue to meet 
once a month in 2006 as it has done since 2001, as stipulated by Central Ba nk 
Law. Unlike 2005, meeting dates will not fall on the same day eac h month. 
However, in line with the principle of transparency, meeting date s for the whole 
year will be announced to the public in advance. As can be seen in the m eeting 
dates of 2006 listed in the Annex, meeting dates are arranged so as to coincide with 
the second half of each month. Meeting dates have been determined by t aking into 
account such factors as official holidays, national and religious fe stivals, the data 
flow process in a month and announcement dates of national income data. In the 
upcoming period, inflation projections will be renewed and the Inflation R eport 
will be issued quarterly, following the announcement of national income figures. 
Hence, four of the twelve Monetary Policy Committee meetings he ld in a year will 
coincide with the release of the Inflation Report.  
44.  In the new period, meetings will be held in two sessions between 2. 00 pm and 
5.00 pm. The first session will host Central Bank authorities and spe cialists as well 
as authorities from the Undersecretariat of Treasury. In this session, related bodies 
of the Central Bank and authorities of the Undersecretariat of Tre asury will present 
to the Monetary Policy Committee their reports on evaluations about economic 
developments, which will then be opened to discussion. In the second sessi on, to 
be held on the same day, members of the Monetary Policy Committee  will make 
the final evaluations about the outlook and put the decision to a vote. Aft er the 
voting is concluded, members of the Monetary Policy Committee wil l prepare a 
brief report explaining the rationale of the decision. The decision and its rationale 
will be announced by the Central Bank in a press release between 5.00 pm and 
7.00 pm on the same day, and it will also be posted on the website of t he Bank.  17 II.  EXCHANGE RATE POLICY, FX BUYING AUCTIONS AND 
LIQUIDITY MANAGEMENT  
 
Exchange Rate Policy and FX Buying Auctions  
45. On 20 December 2004, the Central Bank shared with the public the general  
framework of the current exchange rate policy and FX buying auctions in a press 
release called “Money and Exchange Rate Policy in 2005”. According t o this; 
i. The economic transformation process experienced after the 2001 cris is has 
enabled significant achievements in macroeconomic stabilization and helped 
reduce the “dollarization” effect created by unstable macroeconomic  policies 
and high inflation in the past. The main tendency of economic agents has  
been to hold increasing amounts of Turkish currency denominated assets 
since 2002. This “reverse dollarization” process, combined with favor able 
developments in the balance of payments, has supported the increase in 
foreign exchange supply in the economy. 
ii. Taking into account the likely contribution of a strong foreign excha nge 
reserve position to boost confidence in the current program, foreign debt 
payments of the Treasury and the need to gradually reduce the number of 
high-cost remittances accounts in the long-term, which are peculiar to 
Turkey and make up a significant part in the liabilities side of t he Central 
Bank’s balance sheet, the Central Bank held foreign exchange buying 
auctions to build up reserves at times where foreign exchange supply 
constantly increased compared to foreign exchange demand. Foreign 
exchange buying auctions, which have been held since 1 April 2002, also 
continued in 2003 and 2004 at bands as long as market conditions allowed.  
iii. The main principles of a floating exchange rate regime ar e that the exchange 
rate is not used as a monetary policy tool and the Central Bank does not have 
any exchange rate target. That is why the Central Bank, which fol lows a 
moderate reserve-raising strategy, makes foreign exchange purc hases via 
auctions, whose terms are announced in advance, in order to affect the  supply 
and demand conditions in the foreign exchange market and thus the level of   18 exchange rate at a minimum level and to abide by the basic principle s and 
functions of a floating exchange rate regime. 
iv. In the light of its prediction that the introduction of a new thre e-year 
economic program involving primarily fiscal and monetary discipline  and 
structural reforms and the favorable developments in the process of 
negotiations aimed at full membership to the European Union will have a  
positive effect on both the reverse dollarization process and the bal ance of 
payments, the Central Bank announced that it will resume foreign excha nge 
buying auctions, which had been suspended for a period of time, effective 
from 22 December 2004. Moreover, the Central Bank has decided to 
announce an annual program in order to minimize the impact of foreign 
exchange auctions on foreign exchange. The Central Bank has also decided 
not to make any amendments to the program, unless extraordinary 
differences are observed in foreign exchange liquidity. 
v. Meanwhile, it was emphasized once again that the Central Ba nk will 
continue to closely monitor the volatility in exchange rates and wil l directly 
intervene in the markets in the event of excessive volatility t hat might occur 
in either direction. It was also underlined that volatility interv entions are not 
only carried out by considering past data with a mechanical rule, but by 
evaluating the causes of realized and potential volatility in all  aspects. 
46. With respect to foreign exchange buying auctions held in 2005, it was announc ed 
on 20 December 2004 that the Central Bank would buy maximum USD 45 million 
in daily foreign exchange auctions, with USD 15 million of auction amount  and 
USD 30 million of optional selling amount (200 % of the total amount sold).  These 
amounts were not changed throughout the year. At foreign exchange buying 
auctions, which commenced as of 22 December 2004, USD 7,1 billion in total  was 
bought until 2 December 2005. At a total of 231 auctions held during the said 
period, the average buying sum amounted to USD 30.9 million. 
47. Furthermore, the Central Bank intervened in the foreign exchange mar kets six 
times in 2005 due to excessive realized or expected volatility in e xchange rates. 
Within the  transparency framework, which is a prerequisite for t he implemented 
monetary and exchange rate policies in and has, the Central Bank has started to 
announce the data relating to direct foreign exchange buying/selling i nterventions  19 in the section “Data/Financial Markets Data/Foreign Exchange Buy ing-Selling 
Interventions Against TRL” of its web site (www.tcmb.gov.tr)  starting from 21 
October 2005.  
48. In 2005, net foreign exchange purchases through auctions and interventions 
became USD 21.5 billion by 2 December 2005. The amount of net foreign 
exchange purchases by the Central Bank since 2002 is shown on an annual basis in 
the following Table. The sum of foreign exchange purchases in 2005 is the  highest 
amount that has been bought by the Central Bank in a calendar year to dat e. Hence, 
the amount of net foreign exchange purchases reached USD 37.5 billion in t he 
2002- 2005 period.  
TABLE 2. THE CENTRAL BANK’S NET FOREIGN EXCHANGE 
PURCHASES 
(2002-2005; Million, USD) 
 
 * As of 2 December 2005  
49. The economic program and the accession to the European Union, are expecte d to 
have a favorable effect on both the reverse dollarization process and the balance of 
payments. The general framework for exchange rate policy implement ation 
announced in our press release of 20 December 2004, which is summarized i n 
Article 45, will be valid for 2006. In other words, it was decided t o carry on daily 
foreign exchange buying auctions, predicting that foreign exchange supply w ill 
continue to pursue a high course in 2006. The amount of daily buying in auctions 
will be raised to USD 20 million from USD 15 million in 2006. Unless 
extraordinary differences in foreign exchange liquidity are observed,  the program 
will remain the same. 
50. Guidelines for foreign exchange auctions are as follows: Year FX Buying 
Auctions Net FX Buying 
Interventions Total Net FX 
Buying 
2002 795 4 799 
2003 5.652 4.229 9.881 
2004 4.104 1.274 5.378 
2005* 6.900 14.565 21.465 
Total 17.451 20.072 37.523  20 i. The total daily amount of auctions is determined as USD 20 mill ion for 
2006, starting from 2 January 2006. 
ii. Auctions will not be held on public holidays of the United States, even if it is 
a working day in Turkey. Neither will auctions be held on half working da ys 
or if when the Central Bank has started to intervene in foreign exc hange 
market prior to auction hours. 
iii. The additional optional selling amount priced over the average price of the 
auction will only be granted to the winner parties. The optional amount will 
be 200 percent of the total amount sold in the auction by each bank. 
Accordingly, the maximum daily amount that can be bought will be USD 60 
million, with USD 20 million of auction amount and USD 40 million of 
optional selling amount. 
iv. The auction number will be posted on Reuters page CBTQ at 1.30 p.m . and 
institutions may bid between 1.30 – 1.45 p.m. 
v. After the auction results are posted on the CBTQ page of Reute rs, the 
institutions may exercise their right to sell the optional amount ti ll 2.00 p.m. 
vi. The other rules for the foreign exchange buying auctions have not cha nged 
and will be applied as before. 
vii. On the other hand, the CBRT may, with prior notice, suspend the a uctions 
temporarily in cases where the depth of the foreign exchange market  has 
been lost and thus there is excessive volatility in exchange rate s, in addition 
to when unhealthy price formation is observed due to a serious exogenous 
shock or unforeseen extraordinary developments. 
51. In conclusion, exchange rates will continue to be determined by supply and 
demand conditions in the foreign exchange markets in 2006 as well. The key  
determinants of foreign exchange supply and demand are the monetary and f iscal 
policies and the economic fundamentals determined by the structural re form 
process and expectations. Undoubtedly, the deteriorations in economic 
fundamentals and adverse developments in the stability program and expect ations 
may lead to volatility in exchange rates. It should be borne in mind that in a 
floating exchange rate regime, economic agents operate in an envir onment of 
exchange rate risk. Nevertheless, as repeatedly emphasized by t he Central Bank,  21 exchange rate risk is a manageable risk and economic agents should e stablish the 
mechanisms that will enable the efficient management of this r isk.  
52. The Central Bank had announced in its press release of 2 January 2002 titl ed 
“Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Policy in 2002 and Prospective 
Developments” that it would gradually strip itself of its inter mediary function in 
Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets and would keep up its intermediary 
function only for the foreign exchange deposits of the state-owned banks tha t were 
taken over from the Savings Deposits Insurance Fund (SDIF) banks. How ever, 
foreign exchange deposits of state-owned banks, which were transferred to them 
from SDIF banks and used by these banks in the CBRT Foreign Exchange and 
Banknotes Markets, will be closed as of 26 December 2005 and the interm ediary 
operations of the Central Bank in Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets will 
end as of the said date. On the other hand, banks will be able to borrow foreign 
exchange in terms of USD and euro from the Central Bank within predet ermined 
limits with a one-week-maturity at the Foreign Exchange and Banknote s Market- 
Foreign Exchange Deposit Market in the coming period. Moreover, the 
transactions of purchase/sale of ”foreign exchange against foreign exchange”, 
“foreign exchange against foreign banknotes” and “foreign banknotes agains t 
foreign banknotes” conducted between the Central Bank and institutions 
authorized to operate in the Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets will  
continue. 
Liquidity Management 
53. Following the February 2001 crisis, the Central Bank purchased government  
securities worth TL 14 quadrillion from state-owned banks and banks transf erred 
to the Savings Deposit Insurance Fund (SDIF) in order to meet their  liquidity 
needs. The intensive purchase of foreign exchange in 2003 and 2004 and the 
purchase mentioned above created a substantial amount of excess liquidit y in the 
market during the 2001-2004 period.  The Central Bank sterilized the exces s 
liquidity in the market in an active manner, by means of Turkish li ra deposit 
operations in the Interbank Money Market and reverse repo transactions c arried 
out within the framework of open market operations in the Repo and Revers e Repo 
Market of the Istanbul Stock Exchange. Accordingly, overnight interest  rates were  22 steadily realized at the level of the borrowing rate of the Ce ntral Bank. Within this 
framework, the borrowing rate of the Central Bank has become an indic ator for 
money markets. 
54.  In its press release, “Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy in 2005” , dated 20 
December 2004, the Central Bank had announced that the excess liquidity 
observed in the 2001-2004 period would gradually shrink in 2006, based on the 
main scenario, even it was not possible to make an accurate predic tion for the 
entire amount of the Central Bank’s foreign exchange purchases and the 
Treasury’s net foreign exchange borrowing. Furthermore, the liquidity  
management strategy to be followed in case of liquidity shortage w as explained in 
detail. 
55. Accordingly, the Central Bank did not allow any excessive volatili ty in money 
market rates, when a liquidity shortage appeared from time to ti me. The Central 
Bank efficiently met the liquidity requirements of banks through repo a uctions and 
the liquidity facilities offered to the primary dealers. Howev er, even if temporary 
liquidity shortages were experienced, the excess liquidity conditions continued 
throughout the year as a result of Central Bank’s foreign exchange purc hases via 
foreign exchange auctions and direct buying interventions, far above the  amount 
foreseen under the main scenario. The amount of excess liquidity in the  market 
reached YTL 6.6 billion by 2 December 2005. 
56. According to available data, for the rest of this year and 2006; 
i. The rise in demand for base money, 
ii. Coupon and principal redemption by the Treasury to the Central Bank, 
iii. The increase in Treasury accounts will have a lowering e ffect on the amount 
of liquidity, while 
i. The Central Bank’s net foreign exchange purchases, 
ii. Interests payments to be made by the Central Bank for reser ve requirements 
and for excess liquidity absorbing transactions, 
iii. The utilization of the Treasury’s net foreign exchange inflow s for the 
reimbursement of TL borrowing will have an increasing effect on l iquidity.  
 
57. Unlike the previous periods, the Treasury’s income-expenditures balance  in terms 
of foreign exchange will have a more significant effect on liquidi ty, since  23 privatization revenues and revenues from SDIF sales of assets will reach high 
amounts. It is predicted that the part of these revenues, which wi ll be transferred to 
the Treasury accounts with the Central Bank, will primarily be in terms of foreign 
exchange. Therefore, the Treasury’s foreign exchange transactions might not have 
a decreasing effect on the liquidity in the market. In other words,  in the rest of 
2005 and in 2006, the income of the Treasury from privatization revenues a nd 
SDIF sales of assets, and the amount of FX borrowing may cover t he FX debt 
repayment, including external and domestic debts, or it may lead to an insignificant 
deficit, unlike in the previous years.  
58. Therefore, as in the previous years, it is not possible to make a precise forecast 
regarding the net foreign receipts of the Treasury and the Centra l Bank’s amount 
of foreign currency purchases, which are the basic factors affec ting liquidity. 
Depending on the fluctuations of these amounts, the market liquidity can change 
significantly. However, based on the assumption that the foreign exc hange inflow 
of the Treasury would match the foreign exchange outflow, and by taking the 
Central Bank FX buying auction program  into consideration, the continuity of 
excess liquidity conditions in the markets in 2006 as well as the conti nuation of the 
indicator status of the Central Bank borrowing rate, are most like ly.   
59. In the arrangements regarding the liquidity management strategy  of the Central 
Bank in 2006, some technical interest rate changes for narrowing the potential 
volatility margins of the overnight interest rates are needed w hen the significant 
decreases in the New Turkish Lira interest rates are taken i nto consideration. 
However, such changes do not mean a change determined considering the i nflation 
target of the Central Bank. Because, in the current excess liqui dity conditions, the 
interest rate that the Central Bank determines for the daily bor rowing transactions 
is a benchmark interest rate and no change has been made in the afore mentioned 
interest rate to that end. In this context, the 2006 liquidity managem ent strategy 
will be as follows:  
i. The Central Bank will continue announcing overnight 
borrowing and lending interest rates between 10.00 – 12.00 
and 13.00 – 16.00 in the Interbank Money Market. In case of 
a liquidity shortage during the day, banks can borrow at the 
Central Bank’s lending interest rate within their limits. In c ase  24 of a fall in the interest rates as the result of increasing 
liquidity, banks can  make unlimited New Turkish Lira 
deposits at the Central Bank borrowing interest rate.  Also, 
beginning from 2 January 2006, by lowering the lending 
interest rate by 1 point, the spread between the borrowing and 
lending interest rate which is currently 4 points will be 
lowered to 3 points. 
ii. The Central Bank will continue to provide the Late Liquidity 
Window facility between 16.00-16.30 such that banks may 
borrow from the Central Bank against collateral without any 
limit or lend to the Central Bank. Moreover, starting from 2 
January 2006, the Central Bank (CBRT) lending interest rate 
within the framework of the Late Liquidity Window facility 
will be determined as 3 points higher than the daily lending 
interest rate, and the borrowing interest rate will be 
determined as 4 points lower than the daily borrowing interest 
rate. 
iii. Especially during the periods of interest rate decisions, t he 
announcement made by the Central Bank’s on one-week 
maturity borrowing interest rate leads the excess liquidity to 
be absorbed by the Central Bank, which causes market 
liquidity to decrease. Thus, there may be temporary 
fluctuations in overnight interest rates. To prevent such 
fluctuations, the Central Bank will not announce one-week 
maturity borrowing interest rate at the CBRT Interbank 
Money Market and at the Istanbul Stock Exchange Repo – 
Reverse Repo Market starting from 2 January 2006.  
iv. In case of a temporary or permanent liquidity shortage, the 
Central Bank will continue to carry out liquidity management 
through one-week maturity repo auctions. When there is 
liquidity shortage in the market, the Central Bank will 
announce the amount of repo auction for that day on Reuters’ 
CBTF page at 10.00. While determining the amounts of the  25 auction, the Central Bank will endeavor to maintain the 
average of auction interest rate at approximately 1 point over 
the Central Bank daily borrowing interest rate announced at 
the Interbank Money Market.  
 
v. The weekly repo auctions will be executed at 11:00 and the 
results will be posted on Reuters’ CBTG page no later than 
11:30. The traditional auction method will be used in 
auctions, in other words the successful bidders will be 
evaluated with their own rates. 
vi. In case of unforeseen excessive liquidity shortage, which 
would exert excessive pressure on interest rates in the money 
market during the day, the CBRT may announce “Intraday 
Repo Auctions” in addition to the regular ones. 
vii. The Central Bank will continue to provide TRY liquidity to 
the primary dealer banks through open market operations. 
Currently, the overnight and one-week maturity interest rates 
applicable to the repo facility provided to primary dealers are 
determined 2 points higher than the Central Bank’s daily 
borrowing interest rate. This facility will continue in 2006. 
The primary dealer banks will be able to conduct repo 
transactions between 10.00–12.00 and 13.00–16.00 hours. 
viii. In case of a permanent liquidity shortage in the banking 
system, the benchmark short-term interest rate will be the re po 
auction interest rate not the Central Bank’s daily borrowing 
interest rate. Therefore, in case of a liquidity shortage, the  
interest rate taken as a benchmark by the market would have 
become higher due to the decline in liquidity. In order to 
avoid any negative effects, the Central Bank could revise its 
interest rates – even in cases where the Inflation Outlook 
remains unchanged- so as to counter the pressure created by 
the liquidity shortage. To reiterate, such a change in interest 
rates would only mean a change stemming from liquidity  26 conditions- therefore such a move should not be perceived as 
a loosening or tightening of monetary policy. 
ix. In case of a permanent liquidity shortage in the market, the 
CBRT can terminate its transactions at the Istanbul Stock 
Exchange Repo-Reverse Repo Market with a prior notice and 
start to manage liquidity on its own markets, just like other 
central banks. When the CBRT’s abovementioned liquidity 
management strategy is taken into account, the termination of 
CBRT transactions at Istanbul Stock Exchange Repo-Reverse 
Repo Market is not expected to lead to any significant 
fluctuations in market interest rates.  
60. As stated in CBRT’s Press Release Regarding the Communiqués on Required 
Reserves and Liquidity Requirement dated November 16, 2005, some new 
arrangements have been introduced regarding required reserves and li quidity 
requirement with the aim of helping banks make their liquidity manage ment more 
effective: 
i. With the termination of the liquidity requirement implementation,  the banks 
will no longer be obliged to hold government securities with the CBRT,  
which will enable them to manage their liquidity more flexibly. T his is an 
important step towards the harmonization of financial regulations wit h the 
acquis communautaire. 
ii. As of the end of 2005, the entire amount of TRY required reserves  would be 
maintained on average at free deposit accounts over   a maintenanc e period 
of 2 weeks. Currently, half of the TRY required reserves are obl iged to be 
kept on average at free deposit accounts over a maintenance period   of 2 
weeks and the other half are held in blocked accounts. The new 
implementation will enable the banks to manage required reserves m ore 
flexibly at times of temporary liquidity shortage and help reduce fl uctuations 
in interest rates.  
iii. Meanwhile, the sanctions to be imposed in cases where banks fa il to deposit 
required reserves on time or fail to deposit in full amount have bee n revised. 
Accordingly, the practice of collecting the penalty interest to be imposed for  27 default on required reserves liabilities in cash at once has been abandoned. 
Instead, two-folds of the deficient TRY required reserve amount and three-
folds of the deficient FX required reserve amount will be deposited in non-
interest bearing deposit accounts. The aim of the new practice is  to alleviate 
the prospective unfavorable effects on financial bodies of the banks.   
61. The Central Bank deems stability and deepening of financial markets  as a 
supporting objective for conducting policies pertaining to price stabili ty 
effectively. Actually, within the framework of the floating e xchange rate regime, 
the Central Bank has taken measures towards maintaining financial stability 
several times in the last four years as it did in the after math of the terrorist attacks 
in Istanbul in November 2003. Therefore, the Central Bank, whose primar y goal 
entrusted to it by law, is to establish price stability, will  continue with its efforts 
towards enhancing monetary policy and liquidity management in 2006. 
Accordingly, the Central Bank may change both the liquidity management  strategy 
and interest rate margins  in cases of unpredictable changes in market conditions 
and according to new needs. 
62. In our press release dated December 20, 2004, we had stated that liqui dity was not 
homogenously distributed in the banking sector, however the banking system w as 
expected to contribute to the development of secondary market operations by  
taking into account risk management principles, with the ultimate a im of ensuring 
liquidity flow to achieve a money market which functions effective ly. Although 
currently liquidity is not evenly distributed in the banking system, i t is observed 
that liquidity flow accelerated substantially in 2005 and money marke ts became 
relatively more effective. The gradual improvement in this t rend would not only 
help increase the effectiveness of the monetary policy of the CBR T but also the 
deepening of financial markets. 
63. While on the one hand, tight fiscal and monetary policies implemented since 2001, 
the structural reform process and increased confidence in the economic  policies 
has helped financial deepening and growth in the overall balance sheet of the 
banking system, on the other hand these factors slowed down the rise i n domestic 
debt stock. Thus, a gradual and uninterrupted decline in the ratio of debt s tock to 
national income has been achieved. This development also helps reduce t he share 
of public debt stock in the total balance sheet of the banking system. Assuming  28 that fiscal discipline continued in 2006 and a substantial amount of privat ization 
proceeds were attained, it is estimated that this process would further accelerate. 
The Treasury’s debt servicing ratio,  which is  lower compared to previous years, 
would lead to a further decrease in fiscal dominance this year. T herefore, a rapid 
rise in the banking system’s real sector and consumer credits and i ncreased 
competition and extension in maturities in the credit market are al l developments 
likely to occur. 
64. Obviously, under the floating exchange rate regime the Central Ba nk is able to 
implement the TRY liquidity policy in a more flexible manner than i t can under a 
fixed currency peg regime and can act more promptly and flexibly to meet the 
TRY liquidity needs of the banking system. The Central Bank can prev ent 
excessive fluctuations in interest rates as long as they are consistent with the 
inflation target. The abovementioned liquidity management strategy  manifests this 
fact very clearly. However, the banking system should not slacken risk 
management principles by simply relying on the more flexible and eff ective 
liquidity management of the Central Bank. Quite the contrary, it is obvious that 
increased competition, credit volume and extended maturities would neces sitate a 
more effective risk management stance in the banking system.  
 
Annex 
 
MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING DATES AND INFLATI ON 
REPORT PUBLICATION DATES 
 
 
 
 
MPC MEETING DATES    INFLATION REPORT 
 
23 January 2006       31 January 2006 
23 February 2006 
23 March 2006  
27 April 2006        28 April 2006 
25 May 2006  29 20 June 2006 
20 July 2006        28 July 2006 
24 August 2006 
26 September 2006 
19 October 2006       31 October 2006 
23 November 2006 
21 December 2006 
 
 
 