No: 2006-51  
December 07, 2006  
 
SUMMARY OF MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE DISCUSSIONS 
Meeting Date: 23 November 2006 
 
Inflation Developments 
1. In October, annual inflation in consumer prices decreased compared to the 
previous month and became 9.98 percent. The partial cor rection in 
unprocessed food prices was the main determinant of this i mprovement in 
annual inflation. In addition, developments in oil p rices contributed to the 
favorable inflation outlook in October. 
2. The annual rise in Special CPI Aggregate excluding the  prices of energy, 
unprocessed food products, alcoholic beverages, tobacco produ cts and gold, 
which has started to be published as the -H index by TUR KSTAT beginning 
from September, continued to accelerate in October, rea ching1.82 percent, 
around two-thirds of which originated from the clothin g and the apparel prices. 
The clothing prices, which increased at a higher rate comp ared to the same 
period of the previous year, point to the fact that t he unfavorable price 
movements are attributable to the lagged effects of th e exchange rate pass-
through as well as to the seasonal factors. It is anticipat ed that the monthly rate 
of increase of the H index will decelerate starting fro m December, while the 
annual rate of increase will continue to be at high le vels for a slightly longer 
period of time.  
3. It is calculated that the cumulative exchange rate pass-th rough impact on 
annual inflation of the durable goods prices reached 5. 5 percentage-points 
since the volatility in the financial markets in May–June  period. It is assessed 
that the lagged effects of exchange rate pass-through on  the prices of the 
durable goods group are almost complete as of November.  However, the 
impact of the pass-through is expected to be visible on a nnual inflation for 
around one year.  
4. High rates of increase in prices of the services group conti nued in October as 
well. However, it is expected that the moderation in domestic demand may drive 
the annual inflation in the services group down in the  upcoming period. On the 
other hand, the relatively low level of productivity  in the services sector 
compared to internationally competitive goods together  with the strong 
backward looking component in the pricing behavior of th is group constitute a 
risk factor in terms of achieving the medium-term target s.  
5. The effect of Ramadan on unprocessed food products have co mpletely 
disappeared as of November. Nevertheless, as stated in th e “October Price Developments” report, the weather conditions may have a negative impact on 
November inflation through unprocessed food prices. Howe ver, it is expected 
that the aforementioned effect will be temporary and  will not alter the main 
inflation outlook.  
  
Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) consider s that recent data is 
consistent with the outlook presented in the Inflation R eport. The indicators 
point to a significant slowdown in the private domestic demand, especially on 
interest rate sensitive sectors such as durable goods and hou sing. In 
seasonally adjusted terms, automobile sales registered a r emarkable decline in 
the third quarter compared to the previous one. Furth ermore, developments in 
consumer loans and demand for money confirm the decelera tion in domestic 
demand. 
7. Foreign trade data point to a deceleration in demand  as well since the recently 
available data reveal the fact that imports of consumer  goods have declined 
both in annual terms and in terms of the seasonally adj usted monthly data, 
which can mainly be attributed to developments in consum er durables. Imports 
of consumer durables are declining, whereas the increase i n imports of other 
consumer goods still continues.  
8. Meanwhile, according to the Business Tendency Survey (BTS ), there is no 
decline in domestic demand expectations over the next th ree months in terms 
of seasonally adjusted data. This indicates that expectati ons are not 
pessimistic. 
9. Foreign demand continues to be relatively strong. Alth ough some degree of 
deceleration was observed in the export growth in Octob er due to the impact of 
Ramadan and the religious feast, leading indicators of November reveal that 
this is temporary and the strong course of the external demand is preserved. 
The sustained increase in partial productivity and vigor ous economic activity in 
the European Union continue to support the rise in exp orts. 
10. The high primary budget surpluses have supported the di sinflation process to a 
large extent during the past years. However, considerin g the current level of 
inflation, the composition of the primary budget bala nce in terms of the incomes 
and expenditures items is as crucial as the primary budget  balance itself Opting 
for making adjustments in expenditures rather than raisi ng indirect taxes to 
meet any additional resource requirements that may ari se in line with the 
primary surplus targets will help to fight inflation. Moreover, reflecting the rise in 
the imported input costs of goods produced by State Econo mic Enterprises on 
prices immediately will enhance the predictability and alleviate future risks 
regarding inflation.  11. In sum, it is considered that the slowdown in total dema nd will not be as sharp 
due to both the high level of increases in public expen diture items and the 
relatively strong course of net foreign demand. As a ma tter of fact, the recent 
data on industrial production and capacity utilization rates indicate that the 
deceleration in overall economic activities is not that se vere. Nevertheless, 
Committee members drew attention to the risk that the slowdown in total 
demand might be more significant than expected, should exports display a 
weaker performance than predicted.  In this framework, t he developments in the 
foreign demand will be closely monitored along with d evelopments in domestic 
demand. 
12. The tightening in financing conditions, the increase in the relative prices of 
investment goods and the anticipation of a deceleration  in domestic demand 
caused a loss of pace in investment demand in the second ha lf of the year. 
Seasonally adjusted data on the imports of capital good s and domestic sales of 
commercial vehicles display a decline in the third quarte r compared to the 
previous one. However, the BTS results indicate that, t here is no obvious 
deterioration in investment expenditure tendency for the next twelve-month 
period as of October 2006. In other words, the stable i nvestment tendency is 
expected to continue in line with the expectation that  macroeconomic stability 
will be permanent in the medium-term. 
13. There has been a decline in unemployment rates in the last three months. 
Given that labor force participation and employment r ates follow a relatively low 
course, it is considered that this decline in unemployment  rates does not exert 
pressure on wages and inflation. On the other hand, de terioration in the 
expectations of both the households and firms relating t o the employment in the 
near future is indicative of the fact that the conditio ns in the labor market might 
support the disinflation process. 
14. Inflation expectations continue to improve in November , albeit at a slower pace. 
The expectation that the inflation will follow a decl ining trend in the upcoming 
period remains strong. Nonetheless, the fact that medium  term inflation 
expectations continue to remain considerably above the t argets necessitates 
monetary policy to preserve its cautious stance. 
15. Rapid increases in oil prices have come to a halt in recen t months, although on 
the other hand, the high  level of oil prices continues to exert pressure on costs. 
The accumulated past increases in oil prices have started to  be effective on 
natural gas prices. At this point, it should be noted th at the Committee took 
those lagged effects into consideration beforehand, and any likely changes in 
the electricity prices as well while forming its monetary  policy perspective 
Committee.  
 
 Monetary Policy and Risks  
16. The Committee evaluates that the impact of tightening  monetary policy has 
already started to manifest itself on economic activity a nd that it is expected to 
be observed on inflation in a lagged manner. Neverth eless, given that the 
impact of the upward trend of non-interest public expe nditures on price 
dynamics is not clear, the inflation expectations continue  to follow a high course 
relative to the targets and the uncertainties relating  to the services price inflation 
still prevail, there emerges the risk of higher-than-ex pected inflation inertia.  
Should such a risk materialize, it may be necessary to mai ntain the current tight 
stance of monetary policy for a long time in terms of a chieving medium term 
targets.  
17. Any likely changes in the global risk appetite and the n ew fluctuations that might 
emerge in financial markets accordingly continue to be on e of the main risk 
factors that might deteriorate the inflation outlook. If such a risk materializes and 
medium-term expectations are affected unfavorably, the  CBRT will not hesitate 
to tighten monetary policy through effective liquidit y management or policy rate 
revisions.  
18. In the light of these developments, the Committee assesse s that meeting the 
medium-term inflation targets would necessitate the mai ntenance of the 
cautious policy and decided to keep policy rates unchanged.  However, the 
factors such as the gap between medium-term inflation ex pectations and the 
targets, the risks related to the services price inflation and the uncertainties in 
the global economy require the monetary policy to mai ntain its tight stance.  
19. The Committee closely monitors the lagged effects of the  monetary tightening 
since June. In addition, potential impacts of the recent developments in the 
incomes policy and the non-interest public sector expendit ures are carefully 
evaluated. The CBRT will not hesitate to tighten mon etary policy, in case of any 
new developments that would have unfavorable effects o n medium-term 
inflation outlook. 
20. The continuation of the European Union accession process an d the 
uninterrupted implementation of the structural reform s envisaged in the 
economic program as planned are still crucial in terms of the medium and long-
term outlook. Continued determination in implementin g the decisive steps taken 
in these areas will help the economy to overcome the ad verse changes in the 
international conjuncture at minimum cost.  
 
 
 
 