No: 2006-48            
 November 01, 2006 
 
SUMMARY OF MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE 
DISCUSSIONS 
Meeting Date: 19 October 2006 
 
Inflation Developments 
1. Annual inflation in consumer prices reached 10.55 percent  in September. 
While high rates of increase in the prices of unprocessed f ood products 
continued to affect inflation adversely, oil and gold prices have had a 
favorable impact on inflation in September. Besides th ese factors, it is 
considered that the effect of Ramadan was another deter minant factor of 
September inflation, especially through the prices of p rocessed food 
products. It is expected that this effect will continue in  October price index 
as well, but food prices might adjust in November.  
2. Prices of food group have been playing an important r ole in the rise in 
consumer inflation for the last one year-period. When the sub-items of this 
group are analyzed, it is observed that the rise in th e prices of processed 
food products accelerated recently due to the lagged eff ects of the rise in 
exchange rates. On the other hand, the expected normal ization in the 
prices of processed food products is not yet in place. The f act that the 
prices of fresh fruits, which had decreased by12.9 percent cumulatively in 
the first nine months of 2005, increased by 35.2 percent  in the same 
period in 2006 indicates that supply-side shocks are influe ntial in the 
movements of the prices of unprocessed food products. 
3. The effect of exchange rate movements on consumer durabl es decreased 
in September. It is observed that such effects have alrea dy shown up on 
prices of electrical and non-electrical appliances and auto mobiles to a 
great extent, while the rapid rise in the prices of fu rniture group continues. 
It is expected that the price inflation of the furnitu re group will decelerate in 
the upcoming period as well, in line with the improve ment in cost 
conditions and the slowdown in domestic demand. 
4. High course of increase in the annual prices of services gro up continued in 
September as well. In particular, house rents and hotel -accommodation 
group prices continued to rise rapidly due to the backwar d indexation 
behavior. It is predicted that transportation services pr ices, which are quite 
susceptible to oil prices, will contribute favorably to t he inflation in the 
upcoming period. 5. The annual rise in Special CPI Aggregate excluding the  prices of energy, 
unprocessed food products, alcoholic beverages, tobacco produ cts and 
gold, which has started to be published as the “ÖKTG-H i ndex” by 
TURKSTAT beginning from September, continued to accele rate. As this 
development had already been foreseen by the Central  Bank, it was not 
perceived as new information that could affect the mone tary policy 
decision-making process. As the share of durable goods in th is index is 
quite high, it is affected considerably by the fluctuati ons in the exchange 
rates. Although, it is predicted that, due to the impr ovements in the cost 
factors and the deceleration of domestic demand, the mon thly increases of 
the aforementioned indicators will tend to slow down i n the upcoming 
months, the high course of the annual increases is expected  to continue 
for the time being.  
 
Factors Affecting Inflation  
6. There is a significant deceleration in the demand for p rivate expenditure 
groups such as durable goods and housing that are responsiv e to interest 
rates. Moreover, developments in credit aggregates confi rm the slowdown 
in the domestic demand.  Especially, increase in consumer l oans lost pace 
in the recent months. While housing loans and credit card s show a 
moderate increase, automobile credits are in a decreasing  trend. The 
increase in the total consumer loans mostly stemmed from t he loans, 
which are extended in low amounts with shorter maturit y but higher 
interest rates compared to the housing and automobile l oans. 
7. External demand is relatively strong, albeit not as mu ch as expected. The 
continued increase in partial productivity and the rela tively robust world 
economy continues to support the rise in exports.  
8. Public sector incomes policy is another important factor fo r the medium-
term inflation outlook. Increase in the wages of public sector has a crucial 
role in shaping the inflation expectations. According to  the national income 
statistics announced by the TURKSTAT, almost half of the labor force 
payments come from the public sector. Thus, wages in the p ublic sector 
are also important with regard to the demand-push eff ects. Within this 
framework, the wages awarded to the civil service servant s for 2007 will 
not be able to support the disinflation process.  
9. Due to the persistence of the increase in productivity an d the rise in wages 
remaining limited, the decline in the unit labor costs in the private 
manufacturing industry continued. Compared to the same period in the 
previous year, the unit labor costs decreased by 8.1 perce nt in the second 
quarter of 2006. However, in case the increase in the r eal wages of the 
public sector in the upcoming period becomes a precedent f or the private sector, the decline in the real unit wages of the priva te manufacturing 
industry will be lower compared to the previous period s.  
10. It is considered that the deceleration in aggregate dem and in the second 
half of the year will be limited due to both the hi gh level of increase in 
public expenditure items and the relatively strong cour se of the net foreign 
demand. Thus, although the industrial production in Jul y and August and 
the seasonally adjusted data on capacity utilization rat es of the July-
September period are at lower levels compared to the second quarter of 
the year, they do not point to a significant slowdown in economic activities. 
In addition, Committee members evaluated that the pa st policy measures 
had not been significantly effective on economic activity  yet and that the 
lagged effects should be monitored closely in the upcomin g months.  
11. The continuation of the improvement of inflation exp ectations is 
considered as a favorable development. Nonetheless, the fact that 
medium term inflation expectations continue to remain high above the 
targets necessitates the monetary policy to preserve its cau tious stance. 
12. Rapid increases in oil prices came to a halt in recent mon ths. As a result of 
these developments, the price increases in transportation services lost 
momentum. However, the fact that there will be some l agged effects of the 
past increases in oil prices on natural gas and electricity prices indicate 
that energy prices will continue to affect inflation un favorably in the 
upcoming period.  
 
Monetary Policy and Risks  
13. The medium term inflation target of the Central Ban k is set as 4 percent. In 
order to achieve this target, monetary policy instrumen ts will be used 
effectively. Nevertheless, there exist important risk fact ors that might slow 
down the disinflation process in the upcoming period. 
14. Committee members highlighted the fact that the curren t level of the credit 
interest rates, which are the most important determinan t of domestic 
demand, is considerably high compared to the first half of 2006 and 
assessed that this development will continue to constrain t he credit 
demand of individuals and firms in the upcoming period . However, 
considering the facts that the impact of the upward tren d of non-interest 
public expenditures on the 2007 inflation is not clear and there exist other 
uncertainties regarding the monetary transmission mechani sm, it should 
be borne in mind that the disinflation process may mate rialize at a slower 
pace than anticipated. In case such a risk materializes, in terms of 
achieving the medium term targets, it might be necessary  to maintain the 
current tight stance of the monetary policy for a long time.  15. The likely changes in global risk appetite and the new f luctuations that 
might emerge in financial markets continue to be one of  the main risk 
factors that might deteriorate the inflation outlook. The available indicators 
regarding the US economy point to a gradual slowdown.  This has 
contributed to the improvement in the short-term infl ation outlook by 
limiting the increases in oil prices. On the other hand,  it should be taken 
into account that a rapid slowdown in the US economy mo re than 
expected may lead to a temporary deterioration in th e risk appetite. In 
case such a risk materializes and the medium-term expectati ons are 
affected unfavorably, the CBRT will not hesitate to t ighten monetary policy 
through effective liquidity management or policy rate  revisions.  
16. Risks that may arise from high course of medium-term infl ation 
expectations and the persistence of the backward-looking pr icing behavior 
in the services group stand as another factor leading to uncertainties in 
terms of inflation outlook. The services inflation, which  is currently around 
12 percent, is anticipated to decrease further in a certa in extent next year 
in line with the slowdown expected in domestic demand. However, the 
possibility that the stickiness in services inflation may be higher than 
expected, due to the continuation of backward-looking pr icing behavior 
and other structural factors emerges as a risk element. The  fact that 
incomes policy set for 2007 stipulates high increases in wag es augments 
the risks regarding services prices.  
17. As a result, the Committee has decided to keep policy rat es unchanged 
and maintain the current cautious stance. However, the f actors such as 
the continued presence of a gap between the medium-ter m inflation 
expectations and the targets, the emergence of new risks r elated to 
services prices and the continuation of uncertainties in th e global economy 
necessitate the monetary policy to remain cautious in the  medium term. 
18. In light of these developments, the Committee perceive s that maintaining 
the cautious stance is necessary for the inflation rate to converge to the 
2007 year-end targets. The Committee closely monitors t he lagged effects 
of the monetary tightening that has been carried out since June. In 
addition, the impact of the incomes policy and the non- interest public 
sector expenditures on the 2007 inflation are closely mo nitored as well. 
The CBRT will not hesitate to tighten monetary polic y, in case 
developments with unfavorable effects on medium-term i nflation outlook 
are observed. 
19. The continuation of the European Union accession process an d the 
uninterrupted implementation of the structural reform s envisaged in the 
economic program as planned are still crucial in terms of medium and 
long-term outlook. Continued determination in implem enting the decisive steps taken in these areas will help the economy to overco me the adverse 
changes in the international conjuncture at minimum cost.  