No: 2006 - 12 
 March 15, 2006 
 
Dear Press Members,   
 
Pursuant to the Central Bank Law No. 1211, I was given the mandate of the  Acting 
Governor by the Board, which met yesterday evening at the end of the busi ness hours, to 
fill the vacancy in the Governor’s post due to the retirement of Mr. Süreyya Serdengeçti. I 
would like to extend my gratitude to the Board of the Bank for their trust and kindness. 
  
I have been holding the Vice Governor position at the Central Bank of the Republic of 
Turkey since October 2003. As you have been closely following, we have all  together 
accomplished many achievements in recent years that will alway s be remembered as the 
turning points in our economic history.  
 
The first ones to come to mind are the removal of six zeros from our currency, the point 
we have reached with regard to transparency and accountability in mone tary policy 
decision-making processes, and the transition to formal inflation targ eting at the start of 
2006.  
 
I could comfortably say that, as a result of these developments, the Central Bank of the 
Republic of Turkey has attained world standards in terms of independence, transparency 
and accountability, and become one of the most appreciated central banks of the world.   
 
Of course, the ultimate objective of these three principles is to achieve and maintain price 
stability. In 2006 – the 75th anniversary of the establishment of our Bank, w e can say with 
great pleasure that we have gone a long way on the road to price stability.   
 
Each and every member of the Bank has made significant contributions in this process.  
 
Dear Press Members,  
 
As you know, Mr. Süreyya Serdengeçti, who played a critical role in the planning and 
management of “disinflation” process under the “implicit inflation t argeting” regime 
implemented between 2002 and 2005, has retired as of yesterday evening. Among  other 
members of the Executive Committee, Ms. Sedef Ayalp has retire d as of 8 March 2006, 
and Prof. Fatih Özatay has submitted his petition for retirement t o be effective as of 4 
April 2006. Hence, Prof. Özatay will be able to participate in the M onetary Policy 
Committee meeting to be held on 23 March 2006. 
   
On behalf of myself and of the staff of the Central Bank, I would li ke to extend my most 
sincere gratitude, appreciation and respect to each of my colleagues. 
 
Distinguished members of the press, 
 
Being decision organs of the Bank, the Executive Committee needs the votes of at least 
three members to take a decision, and the Monetary Policy Committe e needs the presence 
of at least five members to convene. 
 While the appointment process is underway for the three very important  positions vacated 
by retirement, it is necessary to ensure that the meetings ar e held and the decision-making 
mechanism operate without any interruptions. Therefore, Mr. Rifat Günay , the Executive 
Director of Banking and Financial Institutions Department of the CBR T is appointed as 
the Acting Vice Governor as of 15 March 2006 for the Vice Governor positi on vacated by 
Ms. Sedef Ayalp by retirement, upon our recommendation and with the approval  of State 
Minister Mr. Ali Babacan. Mr. Günay will assume his duty as the Acting Vice Governor 
in the shortest time possible.  
 
You can have a copy of Mr. Günay’s resume from the Communication Department.   
 
Dear Press Members, 
 
Our monetary policy will continue as detailed in “The General Fra mework of Inflation 
Targeting Regime and Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy for 2006” a nnounced in 
December 2005.  
 
Accordingly, we published our first Inflation Report, which contained the m edium-term 
inflation expectations and a policy perspective, on 31 January 2006. Preparat ions are 
underway for the second Inflation Report that will be published on 28 April 2006. 
Meanwhile, we have been publishing another important communication instrument  of the 
Bank, the Summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Decisions, ever y month since 
January 2006. The Monetary Policy Committee has started to make deci sions by vote as 
of January 2006 as well. 
 
For the first time in Turkey’s history, the Central Bank of the R epublic of Turkey has set 
inflation targets for a three-year period jointly with the Governm ent. These targets are: 5 
percent for 2006; 4 percent for 2007 and 4 percent for 2008 and we have focused on 
achieving these targets. 
 
As you all know, we announced the uncertainty band as 2-percentage point around the 
target-consistent path for the year 2006. Hence, the accountability pri nciple stated in the 
Article 42 of the Central Bank Law was applied concretely.  
 
The floating exchange rate regime is a sine qua non for “inflati on targeting”. Therefore, 
our efforts for the widespread recognition of the “risk awareness” in the public and more 
frequent use of “risk management principles and tools” in both public and pr ivate sectors 
will continue under the floating exchange rate regime.  
 
In this framework, we have planned and started preparations of an interna tional 
conference to be held in fall 2006 that will address the topics of “doll arization” and the 
resulting “fear of float”.  
 
I have the pleasure in expressing that the Central Bank of the Republ ic of Turkey has 
taken many important steps in the past few years. The best exampl es of these steps include 
the re-denomination of Turkish Lira, the achievement of lowering inflat ion to single digits 
after a period of 30 years and the adoption of the inflation-targeting regime in order to 
reduce the inflation to the levels of “price stability” and to keep it there.  
 
Dear Press Members,    
I have a strong belief that every new step that we will make f rom now on will lead both 
the Central Bank and the Turkish Economy to a better footing compared to the previous 
position. 
 
Thank you for your participation.  
 
 
 
 