No: 2006-17 
April 02, 2006  
 
PRESS RELEASE ABOUT THE MAXIMUM INTEREST RATES TO BE APPLIED  
FOR CREDIT CARD TRANSACTIONS 
 
 The monthly maximum contractual interest rate and the monthly maximum 
default interest rate to be applied for credit card transac tions in New Turkish Lira is 
determined as 5,75 percent and 6,88 percent, respectively.  
The monthly maximum contractual interest rates are determined a s 5,75 percent for 
New Turkish Lira, 2,68 percent for US dollar and 2,68 percent for Euro by the  Communique 
No: 2006/1 on Maximum Interest Rates To Be Applied For Credit Card O perations, published 
in the Official Gazette dated April 2, 2006 and No: 26127. Similarly, the  monthly maximum 
default interest rates are determined as 6,88 percent for New Tur kish Lira, 3,34 percent for 
US dollar and 3,05 percent for Euro.  
The interest rates stated above are maximum rates and banks wil l not be allowed to 
apply interest rates higher than these rates beginning from June 1, 2006. Banks can freely 
determine their interest rates provided that they do not surpass these ceiling rat es.  
According to the third provisional article of Bank Cards and Credit Ca rds Law, 
institutions that issue cards should make necessary adjustment in the ir interest rate 
calculations within three months in accordance with the provision of this  Law. For this 
reason, banks are obliged to adjust their credit card interest rate s in accordance with the 
maximum interest rates mentioned above, beginning from June 1, 2006. In other words, the 
maximum interest rates announced by Central Bank of the Republic of T urkey (CBRT) today 
will be effective between June 1, 2006 and July 2, 2006. Before July 2, 2006, the C BRT will 
announce the maximum interest rates to be effective for the subsequent 3-month period. 
Credit card, in general, is a payment instrument that enables its  owner to purchase 
goods and services at the member businesses without using cash. Moreover , if the credit card 
users wish to withdraw cash or to delay their credit card spending for a determined period, the 
relevant spending amounts turn into credit and thus credit card becomes a  credit instrument. 
Institutions issuing credit cards undertake POS (Point of Sale) ma chines investment cost and 
membership cost to national and international payment systems, and they  are exposed to 
additional liquidity risk due to unforeseen cash withdrawals.  In that regard, banks tend to determine higher credit card interest rates than those of 
consumer credits due to higher credit risk because of weak collater al structure and liquidity 
risk because of unforeseen cash withdrawals. A survey of country pract ices also reveals that 
credit card interest rates are determined higher than the inter est rates set for consumer credits. 
However, it is observed that the difference between these rates i s much narrower than it is in 
our country.   
For instance, in the USA, the average yearly interest rates a pplied on consumer credits 
is 7,5 percent, while the average yearly interest rate applied on credit cards is 12,5 percent. In 
England, these rates are 14,2 percent and 16,5 percent; 12 percent and 16,8 perce nt in 
Australia; and 13,7 percent and 18,8 percent in New Zealand. However, these rates are 22,6 
percent (as of January 2006) and 84,8 percent (as of February 2006) in Turkey. 
The primary reason of the wider gap in the interest rates betwe en credit card and 
consumer credit in our country compared to the other countries was the m arket expectations 
of a new regulation concerning credit cards beginning from 2005 and the fa ct that the content 
of such regulation could not have been foreseen exactly. Moreover, it is considered that the 
provision of the Consumer Protection Law No: 4077 stating that default int erest rate cannot 
exceed the contractual interest rate  by more than thirty perce nt, would be another reason. 
This close connection has given rise to the determination of higher cont ractual interest rates to 
enable banks to keep the default interest rates higher in an environment  where banks can 
freely determine contractual interest rates. 
To prevent this inconvenience, by the Bank Cards And Credit Cards Law No: 5464, 
which became effective on 1 March 2006  it is enacted that the regulation  which set the 
connection between contractual interest rate and default interest r ate in the Consumer 
Protection Law No: 4077 shall not be applied for credit cards. On the othe r hand, the 26 th  
Article  of the Bank Cards And Credit Cards Law gives the Centr al Bank of the Republic of 
Turkey the duty of determining the maximum contractual and maximum de fault interest rates. 
In addition, the same Law has clearly specified the rights and re sponsibilities of the related 
parties to a  credit card transaction and regulated the infrastr ucture and operation of the 
system. 
The legal grounds of the above mentioned Article 26 draw attention to the  fact that 
there are wide gaps among the credit card interest rates appli ed by banks and moreover, some 
banks apply interest rates above the sector average. The duty entrust ed to our Bank by this 
Law is to prevent the application of interest rates higher than the  sector average, to closely 
monitor the developments in the credit card market with a view to the  financial stability objective and to ensure the stabilization of the credit card interes t rates based on market 
dynamics, rather than intervening directly to interest rates, whic h is contrary to the free 
market principles. 
Country practices show that in general, the credit  interest rat es are freely determined 
in the market. However, some countries may impose ceilings on the int erest rates to prevent 
excessively high interest rates within the framework of consumer protection. 
In the French case, it is forbidden by law to implement an interest  rate exceeding the 
sector average by more than  thirty three percent. Banque de France  makes public the 
excessive interest rates calculated on a quarterly basis. A s imilar regulation also exists in Italy 
and the interest rates to be applied by a bank cannot exceed the avera ge interest rates 
calculated by the Ministry of Economy  by more than fifty percent, after taking the opinion of 
the Banca d’Italia. 
Our Bank has set the monthly maximum interest rates on credit ca rds by adding 0,5 
point market margin to the weighted average interest rates of t he banking sector. The same 
method has been used for determining the maximum default interest rates.   
The monthly maximum contractual interest rates applied by banks for their credit card 
transactions differ between 2,75 percent and 6,5 percent. Therefore, the cr edit card holders 
can enjoy a broad spectrum of interest rate alternatives and can f reely decide which one to 
choose. In the coming days, the monthly maximum interest rates applie d by banks will be 
published in our Bank’s web site and will be updated regularly if any c hanges occur. Thus, 
the credit card holders will be able to choose the banks that apply low er interest rates by 
checking these interest rates. It is expected that, the prefere nces of credit card users towards 
the banks offering lower interest rates are likely to increase  the competition in the banking 
sector and hence to decrease the credit card interest rates. In this regard, it is predicted that the 
interest rates applicable to credit cards will decline even fur ther in the coming period, by way 
of competition. 