No: 2006-39            
 July 31, 2006 
SUMMARY OF MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE DISCUSSIONS 
Meeting Date:  20 July 2006 
  
  
Inflation Developments 
1. The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (Central Bank) has start ed to 
publish a technical note focusing on inflation developments within two days of 
the announcement of price indices with the aim of contributing to the bet ter 
understanding of monthly inflation data. In this framework, as was stat ed in 
the press release dated July 4, 2006, the decline in prices of unprocesse d food 
along with the rise in prices of consumer durables and energy prices  due to 
developments observed in exchange rates became the determining factor s for 
inflation in June. Thus, the impact of exchange rates on annual inflation in the 
last two months reached 1.5 percentage points.  
2. It is estimated that the effect of exchange rates on prices will continue to be 
felt strongly in July and eventually start to diminish as of August . However, as 
it will take more than a year to mop up the effects of supply-orie nted 
developments observed in the last few months on annual inflation, annual 
inflation will continue to be high in the short-term. The measures ta ken by the 
Central Bank in June will ease pressures on inflation in the upcoming period.  
3. Annual inflation of the CPI excluding energy, unprocessed food, alcoholic 
beverages, tobacco products and gold, which is calculated in order to meas ure 
the general inflation trend, increased compared to the previous month and 
reached 6.1 percent, while the monthly rise became 0.54 percentage points, 
when seasonally adjusted. It is estimated that this rate will continue to increase 
in July also.  
4. Effects of the recent movements of exchange rates on inflation ca n be handled 
in two categories as primary and secondary effects. Primary e ffects cover 
mostly price adjustments in prices of goods with a high imported compone nt. 
These effects, which are observed as the relative price discrepa ncy between 
tradable goods and non-tradable goods, can lead to a temporary rise in 
inflation. However, such effects do not change the medium-term inflati on 
trend, as they do not disrupt the general pricing behavior. Therefore, cent ral 
banks that act on medium term perspective do not give policy responses t o 
these primary effects.  
5. The secondary effects emerge when the rising tendency of prices is not limited 
to goods with imported components, but is spread to the entire economy. Such 
an effect, which might lead to an uninterrupted rise in the general price level, 
may mean that the rise in inflation is permanent and in such a cas e reducing 
inflation again would be too costly. Therefore, while evaluating the ef fects of 
exchange rates and oil prices on inflation, central banks attach gre at 
importance to the secondary effects.  6. The secondary effects arise mainly through expectations. Therefore , the recent 
developments in inflation expectations have become more significant. The  
supply-oriented shocks that had significant pressure on inflation along wit h the 
rapid depreciation of the national currency have disrupted inflation 
expectations. In other words, the risk of disrupting pricing behavior of the  
entire economy has emerged. No significant improvement was observed i n 
medium-term expectations as of the first half of July. Even if i t is expected 
that the recent decisions of the Committee will contribute to impr oving 
expectations and curbing secondary effects, there is still the nee d to adopt a 
cautious stance. 
  
Outlook and Factors Affecting Inflation  
7. By increasing the tendency to avoid risks, the recent fluctuations in financial 
markets are naturally reducing banks’ appetites to provide credits. M oreover, 
the rise in short-term interest rates that also boosted the costs of f unding stands 
as a factor that could tighten the supply of credit. The Central Ba nk sterilized 
the excess liquidity in the market via weekly and bi-weekly New Turkish lira 
(YTL) deposit purchase auctions as well as via foreign exchange s ales 
auctions, which led to a decrease in the amount of funds banks can convert t o 
credits. This development stands as another factor that might tighte n the 
supply of  credit.  
8. The rise in credit interest rates in the recent period leads t o a decline in the 
amount of credit demanded. The slowdown in credits, which is expected to be  
observed in line with the rise in interest rates, emerges with a time lag due to 
the rigidities in financial contracts. Nevertheless, considering t he recent credit 
developments, it can be said that the rate of increase in consumer c redits tends 
to slow down. In light of currently available information, the slowdown in the 
rate of increase in credits is expected to become more signifi cant in the 
upcoming period.  
9. Recent developments in financial markets have once again underlined the 
significance of proper risk management by banks, households and firms under 
the floating exchange rate regime. In the forthcoming period, the Ce ntral Bank 
will continue to closely monitor banking and credit developments in terms  of 
both financial stability and price stability. 
10.  Along with the slowdown in credits, the upcoming three-month tendency of 
domestic market orders and sales indicators from the Business Tende ncy 
Survey (BTS) also showed declines in May. Supporting these indicators, 
domestic sales of automobiles rapidly decreased in June compared to t he 
previous month. Besides, the Consumer Confidence Index also registered a 
decline.  
11.  Meanwhile, it is anticipated that net foreign demand will follow a  strong 
course and especially the activity in the production of the export-orie nted 
private manufacturing industry will continue strong due to continued global 
growth and the depreciation of the YTL. The fact that the Real Sec tor 
Confidence Index has not registered a significant decline by June and the 
capacity utilization rates especially in exports-oriented sect ors remained at 
high levels during the same period also supports this anticipation. 12.  As a result, although the Committee projects that domestic demand w ill lose 
pace in the second half of the year due to the fluctuations observed in f inancial 
markets in May and June and the monetary policy decisions taken, it al so 
expects the strong course of net foreign demand to restrain the slow down in 
the economic activity. Nonetheless, taking the economic activity as a whole in 
view of sectors sensitive to domestic demand such as the services sector, it is 
anticipated that the decrease in domestic demand will be more dete rmined 
than the increase in net foreign demand, and thus the contribution of demand 
conditions to the disinflation process will continue in an accelerated manner in 
the second half of the year.  
13.  The fact that no significant decline was observed in investment tende ncy in 
the recent period is seen as a favorable development in terms of the  
continuation of productivity increases. This outlook is anticipated to help ke ep 
the secondary effects of exchange rate movements limited. However , there is 
still a need to remain cautious regarding inflation given that the oil and other 
commodity prices are still increasing and the expectations are not yet in line 
with the medium-term targets. 
14.  Being focused on the 2007 year-end inflation target and taking all these  
factors into account, the Committee decided to move toward a measured 
tightening of monetary policy and raised policy rates by 0.25 basis point s. In 
light of the existing risks, the Committee considers that the ca utious stance is 
very likely to continue for some time. Under this cautious stance, the  
downward trend in inflation is expected to be significant in the second quarter 
of 2007.  
15.  There is no doubt that the control of the secondary effects mentioned above  
will depend mainly on the continuation of fiscal discipline and structura l 
reforms. In particular, in order to attain medium-term targets i t is of critical 
importance that medium-term inflation targets are taken into acc ount in the 
incomes policy and that the need for unprogrammed public price and tax 
adjustments is precluded by respecting the limits of budgetary expenditures.  
  
 Risks 
16.  The probability of crude oil prices climbing further continues to be an 
important risk factor for inflation. As before, the Central Bank wil l not 
respond to the primary effects of increases in oil prices. However , it is also 
true that, along with the deterioration of expectations recently, it  became 
necessary to be more cautious about the secondary effects of oil pri ces. Should 
the developments in oil prices affect medium-term inflation expect ations 
adversely or start to disrupt pricing behavior, necessary policy mea sures will 
be taken.  
17.  The main development that marked the economic conjuncture in the recent 
period is the fluctuations in financial markets, which emerged due to the 
change in international liquidity conditions. Central banks of developed 
countries may continue the tightening process because of the concerns a bout 
inflation and the extent of further tightening is not clear at this  point. This 
outlook has increased the uncertainties in the global liquidity conditions. The 
rapid changes in global risk appetite and the possible fluctuations in t he global liquidity continue to be one of the major risk factors for inflation. In case such 
a risk occurs, the Central Bank will act with a medium-term per spective: It 
will not respond to the temporary increase in inflation induced by the c hanges 
in relative prices, however it will closely monitor medium-term inflation 
expectations, as it did recently.  
18.  Along with the decline in inflation in recent years, inflation targ ets have 
increasingly become a benchmark variable for pricing decisions. Howeve r, the 
deterioration of medium-term expectations after recent developments , presents 
the risk of referring to a variable other than the inflation targe t, such as past 
inflation, in pricing decisions. In case such a risk occurs, the Centra l Bank will 
not hesitate to give the necessary response and will continue its c autious 
stance until the medium-term inflation expectations of economic age nts 
converge to targets. In this context, the developments that might espe cially 
affect expectations, such as international liquidity conditions, the cour se of 
domestic demand, pricing behavior and the public sector income policy will be 
monitored closely in the forthcoming period.  
19.  Under current conditions, it is of great importance for both price sta bility and 
macroeconomic stability that any implementation that would damage r isk 
perceptions and expectations is avoided. Any step towards limiting the risk 
perception would reduce the cost of attaining and continuing stability. It  
should be borne in mind that the main determinant of the continuation of non-
inflationary growth is the confidence in the permanence of macroeconomi c 
stability. The continuation of a determined attitude towards structura l reforms 
that would increase the quality of fiscal discipline and the uninterr upted 
implementation of reforms that would enhance the competition and investment 
environment, and thus underpin increases in productivity in the long term, are  
of critical importance. In this context, continuation of the European Union 
accession process and uninterrupted implementation of structural reform s in 
the economic reform program are crucial.  The continuation of the dete rmined 
steps taken in recent years in this context will help the economy to overcome 
the changes in the international conjecture with minimum cost.  
  
  