No: 2006-55  
        04 January 2007 
SUMMARY OF MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE DISCUSSIONS 
Meeting Date: 21 December 2006 
 
 
Inflation Developments 
1. While the consumer inflation increased by 1.29 percent i n November, the 
annual inflation decreased compared to the previous mon th. The seasonal 
increases in unprocessed food and clothing and footwear gr oup prices played 
an important role in consumer inflation in November. Price increases in these 
groups comprised about 0.94 percent of consumer inflation  of November. 
Meanwhile, housing group-oriented energy items display ed increases as well. 
There has been some decline in the prices of consumer dura bles due to the 
effects of the deceleration in domestic demand and the st able course of the 
exchange rates.  
2. The Monetary Policy Committee (Committee) noted that  uncertainties pertaining 
to unprocessed food prices continued. The rate of increase in unprocessed food 
prices displayed a significant deceleration in the last fe w months. However, the 
adverse weather conditions coupled with the decrease in a gricultural 
production, especially in grain production, may affect f ood prices negatively in 
the upcoming period. Within this framework, food prices continue to be a risk 
factor for inflation. 
3. The annual rise in the special CPI Aggregate-H excludin g the prices of energy, 
unprocessed food products, alcoholic beverages, tobacco produ cts and gold, 
reached 9.13 percent in November, remaining relativel y stable compared to the 
previous month.  As the increases in the prices of clothing  group in the new 
season has terminated, the primary effects of the exchang e rates were 
completed to a great extent as of December. It is proje cted that the monthly  
increases in H-index would decelerate in the upcoming pe riod compared to the 
second half of 2006. However, it will take longer for the effects of supply shocks 
that have been experienced in the previous period on annual  change to 
diminish. Accordingly, no significant decrease is expected i n inflation that is 
calculated by the H- index until the second half of 200 7.  
4. The annual rate of increase in services prices still preserv es its course. The 
house rents item, which continued to increase rapidly in November, constrained 
the deceleration in services prices inflation. In line wi th the decrease in 
domestic demand, annual price inflation in services group  is expected to 
slowdown in the upcoming period. Meanwhile, taking int o account the fact that the pricing behavior in services sector is highly susceptible  to wages, it is 
believed that services prices continue to be a significant risk factor in terms of 
attaining the medium-term targets.    
Factors Affecting Inflation  
5. The Committee considers that recent data is broadly consist ent with the outlook 
presented in the October Inflation Report.  
6. Indicators pertaining to private sector consumer demand p oint to a significant 
slowdown. The decline in expenditures especially on consum er durables and 
investment goods stands as an important factor in the dece leration of consumer 
demand. In line with the deceleration in domestic dema nd, annual GDP growth 
decreased to 3.4 percent in the third quarter, confirmi ng our earlier projections 
that demand conditions would support the decline in inf lation. 
7. The deceleration in consumer demand in the third quart er can be attributed 
both to the decline in consumer confidence and the fluctu ations in the exchange 
rates. The decline in private consumption demand halted  as these effects 
started to disappear as of the fourth quarter. Seasonal ly adjusted data suggest 
that the decline in  automobile sales observed in the third quarter stopped in 
October-November period. The upward trend of sale of white goods continued 
in this period as well. Consumer credits and consumption i ndices indicate that 
the tendency to lose pace stagnated in November. The in dicators in the 
Business Tendency Survey (BTS) related to the volume of  sales in the domestic 
goods market and the expectations regarding the amount of new orders 
received from the domestic market for the next three mo nths do not point out a 
slowdown in private consumption demand beyond the thir d quarter.  
8. The foreign demand remains relatively strong. Due to the fact that exports 
increased faster than imports in real terms in the third  quarter of 2006, net 
exports had a favorable impact on growth.  Indicators p ertaining to November 
and December 2006 indicate that the strong course of for eign demand 
continues. Persistence of increases in partial productivity,  continuation of the 
vigorous economic activity in the EU, and the Euro gain ing strength against the 
US dollar support the increase in exports. Foreign dema nd is expected to keep 
its strong position in 2007 as well. 
9. The value added of the industrial sector continued to i ncrease in the third 
quarter of the year with the help of strong foreign demand. Even though the rate 
of industrial production in October was low due to the effect of the religious 
holiday in Ramadan, expectations of companies operating  in production 
industry and increase in utilization ratios in November  indicate that industrial 
production will display a strong trend in the fourth q uarter as well. 
10. The tightening in financing conditions, the increase in the relative prices of 
investment goods and the anticipation of a deceleration  in domestic demand 
caused the investment demand to slowdown in the second ha lf of the year. Seasonally adjusted data on the imports of capital good s and sales of 
commercial vehicles displayed an upward trend recently, t hereby indicating a 
possible recovery in the machinery-equipment investments in the last quarter of 
the year. The BTS indicators support this outlook by sugg esting that there is no 
obvious deterioration in investment expenditure tende ncy for the next twelve-
month period. 
11. Construction permit statistics point out that construction i nvestments will 
continue to grow. Even though it is remarkable that th e production of non-metal 
minerals – which is one of the leading indicators of const ruction activities – has 
decelerated, considering the fact that exports have decli ned and imports have 
increased recently in this sector, the strong course of the construction sector is 
expected to persist. 
12. The public sector expenditures continued to increase in th e third quarter of 
2006 and a similar tendency is anticipated for the last quarter as well. The 
Committee closely monitors the effects of the adjustments in the incomes policy 
and the developments in non-interest public sector expen ditures on inflation 
and inflation expectations. 
13.  In summary, it is predicted that the deceleration in t he economy will not reach 
the level of stagnation and the economic activity will gradually recover. In the 
last quarter of 2006, the level of annual growth mig ht be low due to the high 
basis effect in the same period of 2005. However, owing  to the relatively strong 
course of foreign demand and increases in public sector exp enditure items, the 
slowdown in total demand is not expected be sharp and t he annual growth rates 
are estimated to increase beginning from the second half  of 2007.  
14.  Productivity increases in private manufacturing industry  continued in the third 
quarter of the year. In the last quarter, the manufa cturing industry workers index 
is not expected to display a significant change, while th e increase in production 
is estimated to strengthen slightly. In this framework, i t is expected that the 
increases in productivity will persist in the last quarter  of the year, as well and 
that unit wages in the manufacturing industry will cont inue to support the 
disinflation process.   
15. The expectations that the main course of inflation will  be downward in the 
upcoming period remained strong in December, as well. T he inflation 
expectations that displayed a scattered outlook in June an d July gained a more 
consistent structure as of December. This development is consi dered to be an 
indicator of the diminishing uncertainties regarding in flation. Nonetheless, 
medium term inflation expectations continue to remain high above the targets. 
 
 Monetary Policy and Risks  
16. The current level of inflation is well above the medi um term targets. It is 
expected that the tight stance of the monetary policy w ill continue to restrain the private consumption demand and pull down inflation gr adually. Nevertheless, 
the ambiguities relating to the impact of the upward trend in non-interest public 
expenditures on price dynamics together with the persiste nce of both high 
expectations and uncertainties regarding services prices crea te the risk that 
inflation will display stronger resistance against the di sinflation process than 
expected.  
17. The CBRT produces its medium term forecasts under the assum ption that 
supply shocks will vanish in time. However, the current da ta indicates that 
neither the risks related to energy prices nor those rela ted to unprocessed food 
prices disappeared. As long as medium term expectations ar e not affected 
unfavorably, the CBRT will not respond to the tempor ary fluctuations deriving 
from these two factors that are beyond its control.  
18. The likely changes in the global risk appetite and the n ew fluctuations that might 
emerge in financial markets accordingly continue to be on e of the main risk 
factors that might deteriorate the inflation outlook. In case such a risk 
materializes and medium-term expectations are affected unfavorably, the CBRT 
will not hesitate to tighten monetary policy through effective liquidity 
management or policy rate revisions. 
19. In the light of these developments, the Committee assesse s meeting the 
medium term inflation targets would necessitate the mai ntenance of the 
cautious policy stance and decided to keep policy rates uncha nged. Factors 
such as the gap between the medium-term inflation expe ctations and the 
targets, the risks related to services price inflation and the uncertainties in the 
global economy require that the monetary policy maint ain its tight stance.   
20. The Committee closely monitors the lagged effects of the  monetary tightening 
since June. Moreover, the potential impact of the progr ess in the structural 
reform agenda and the developments in the incomes poli cy as well as the non-
interest public sector expenditures on the inflation and  the inflation expectations 
are carefully evaluated. The CBRT will not hesitate t o tighten monetary policy in 
case developments that would have unfavorable effects on  medium-term 
inflation outlook.  
21. The continuation of the European Union accession process an d the 
uninterrupted implementation of the structural reform s envisaged in the 
economic program as planned are still crucial. The develo pments related to the 
structural reforms that will enhance the quality of fisca l discipline in the medium 
and long terms are monitored closely in terms of both m acroeconomic and price 
stabilities. Continued determination in implementing the decisive steps taken in 
these areas in recent years will help the economy overcom e the adverse 
changes in the international conjuncture at minimum cost.   