No: 2006-35 
26 June 2006  
PRESS RELEASE  
ON 
 THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE SALE AND NEW TURKISH LIRA DEP OSIT  
PURCHASE AUCTIONS HELD BY THE CENTRAL BANK OF THE R EPUBLIC OF 
TURKEY  
 
The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (CBRT) h as decided to implement a 
strong monetary tightening and the Monetary Policy Committee increased the policy rates on 
June 26, 2006. Parallel to the increase in policy r ates, The CBRT has also decided to sterilize 
the excess liquidity in the money markets to enhanc e the effectiveness of the decision on 
monetary tightening. .  
The Monetary Policy Committee has stated that prope r functioning of the foreign 
exchange market is an important prerequisite to ach ieve the target on price stability. So the 
Committee has expressed its support for effective i ntervention in the market to provide 
foreign exchange liquidity via its available instru ments.   
Parallel to turmoil in the international financial markets, the financial markets of 
Turkey have experienced excessive fluctuations in t he foreign exchange markets in the recent 
period. It is observed that the decline in the fore ign exchange liquidity both triggers the 
excessive fluctuations and also encourages speculat ive behaviors in the market.  
Following the assessments of Monetary Policy Commit tee, the CBRT has decided to 
hold  “Foreign Exchange Sale Auction” and “ New Tur kish Lira Deposit Purchase Auction” 
effective as of June 26, 2006 within the framework of the following principles.  
 
A) FOREIGN EXCHANGE SALE AUCTIONS 
 
Adhering to the principles of the floating exchange  rate regime, the CBRT will be 
more vigilant against excessive fluctuations incohe rent with the economic fundamentals and 
that undermine the stability in the financial marke ts and triggered by the exogenous factors, uncertainties and speculative behaviors. Accordingl y, the CBRT will provide foreign 
exchange liquidity to the market via auctions, in c ase where the foreign exchange markets 
experience a decline in liquidity and/or poor price  formations. In case where foreign exchange 
sale auctions fail to meet the need for liquidity i n foreign exchange markets the CBRT will 
not hesitate to intervene in the markets via direct  foreign exchange sales. The markets and the 
public will be informed about the amounts of foreig n exchange sales at 10.00 a.m. before 
auctions are held. The daily maximum amount set for  the auction held on June 26, 2006 is 
USD 500 million.   
Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Sale Auctions are a s follows: 
1.  The institutions authorized to operate in the Forei gn Exchange and 
Banknotes Markets may attend the auction. 
2.  The auction number will be posted on Reuters page C BTQ at 1:30 p.m. and 
institutions may submit their offers between 1:40 –  2:00 p.m. The offers shall 
be sent via Electronic Fund Transfer (EFT). 
3.  The auction will be held under the method of multip le price auctions.  
4.  The results for auctions will be posted on Reuter’s  page CBTQ.  
5.  The minimum amount that can be offered will be USD 1 million and 
multiples thereof.  
6.  The maximum amount offered by each institution will  be limited as 20 
percent of the total auction amount.  
7.  Institutions will not be able to change their offer  amounts and prices during 
the auction.  
8.  In case there is more than one offer for the price where the auction is 
finalized, the distribution will be made on pro-rat a basis.   
9.  The institutions that do not fulfill their obligati ons arising from the auctions 
will be subject to the sanctions specified in the I mplementation Instructions 
of the Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets.  
  B) NEW TURKISH LIRA DEPOSIT PURCHASE AUCTIONS 
The excess liquidity withdrawn by the CBRT from the  system varies between USD 
10-15 billion. In order to enhance the effectivenes s and flexibility of monetary policy, it has 
been decided that New Turkish Lira Deposit Buying A uctions, the details of which are given 
below, are initiated for 1 and 2-week standard matu rities in addition to the transactions 
already executed in the Interbank Money Market. 
 
Guidelines for New Turkish Lira Deposit Purchase Au ctions are as follows: 
  
1.  From June 26, 2006 onwards, New Turkish Lira Deposi t Purchase Auctions for 
1 week and 2 week maturities will be held every wor king day of the week 
2.  The total amount that will be bought in both auctio ns will not exceed YTL 500 
million. The allocation of the total amount among t he auctions will be 
determined by the CBRT according to the offers rece ived. 
3.  The method of multiple-price auctions will be intro duced in the YTL deposit 
purchase auctions. 
4.  All banks eligible to make transactions in the Inte r-bank Money Market are 
allowed to participate in the auctions. 
5.  The notice for the auction will be announced on Reu ters page “CBTY” and the 
results of the auction will be announced on Reuters  page “CBTZ” 
6.  The banks will submit offers between 10:00-11:00 a. m. 
7.  The minimum amount of offers will be YTL 1 million and multiples thereof. 
8.  The banks will not be able to change the amounts an d interest rates for their 
offers during the auction process. 
9.  The interest rates to be offered will be on a yearl y basis and expressed in figures 
either without decimal or in percentage points as X X.00, XX.01, XX.02, XX.03, 
etc.  
10.  If there is more than one offer for the interest ra te that the auction is awarded to, 
the distribution will be made on pro-rata basis. An y figure thus obtained will be 
rounded downward as 50 thousand New Turkish Liras a nd multiples thereof.  
11.  The banks willing to participate in the auction wil l submit their offers via EFT 
system with “HABR-TKLF” message. The auction code f or these messages is determined as “7” and the auction number will be an nounced on Reuters page 
“CBTY” on each auction day.  
12.  The winner banks are obliged to transfer the amount s offered to the CBRT with 
the message MERV-PAR1, reference “IHL” and explanat ion “Inter-Ihale 
Bedeli” until 5:30 p.m. at the latest on the value date.  
13.  No transaction commission will be charged in the au ctions.  
14.  In case a bank fails to fulfill its obligations ari sing from these auctions, the 
current practice for the Interbank Money Market wil l be applied in terms of 
default interest rate and administrative sanctions.  The bank will be subject to the 
CBRT’s implementation instructions and the Interban k Money Market 
Commitment Agreement signed by banks in case it fai ls to fulfill its obligations 
within the specified time.  
15.  An early notice will be published by the CBRT if a change is made in the 
guidelines governing the YTL deposit purchase aucti ons or if the auctions are 
terminated. 
 
 
 