No: 2006-50 
23 November 2006 
THE DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: 23 November 2006 
 
Committee Members Participated in the Meeting  
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, 
Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (Committee) has decided  to  keep  short-
term interest rates (policy rates)  unchanged in the Inter-bank Money Market and 
the Istanbul Stock Exchange Repo-Reverse Repo Market as fo llows:  
a) Overnight Interest Rates:  The overnight borrowing interest rate is 17.50 
percent, and the overnight lending interest rate is 22.50 percent.  
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates:  Within the framework of the Late 
Liquidity Window Facility, the overnight borrowing i nterest rate valid between 4:00 
p.m. – 4:30 p.m. in the Inter-bank Money Market is 13.50 percent, while the lending 
interest rate is 25.50 percent.  
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturit y borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealer banks via repo transactions within the framework of 
open market transactions is 21.50 percent. 
The Committee considers that the recent data is consistent with the outlook 
presented in the Inflation Report. The slowdown in th e aggregate demand continues 
as expected. While the private sector demand indicators p oint to a significant 
slowdown, the foreign demand remains relatively strong . Inflation expectations 
continue to improve. However, the factors such as the gap  between the medium-term 
inflation expectations and the targets, the risks related  to the services price inflation 
and the uncertainties in the global economy require th e monetary policy to maintain its 
tight stance. Apart from these issues, the Committee note s, as stated in the “October 
Price Developments” report, that weather conditions may  have a negative impact on 
November inflation through food prices. 
In light of these developments, the Committee assesses tha t meeting the 
medium-term inflation targets would necessitate the mai ntenance of the cautious 
policy stance. The committee closely monitors the lagged e ffects of the monetary 
tightening since June. Moreover, the potential impact o f the recent developments in 
the incomes policy and the non-interest public sector expe nditures on inflation and 
inflation expectations are carefully evaluated. The CB RT will not hesitate to tighten 
monetary policy in case of any new developments that wo uld have unfavorable effects 
on the medium-term inflation outlook. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to inflation 
outlook will lead the Committee to reconsider its stance.   
A brief summary of the assessments of the Committee will be released within 
five working days. 