No: 2006-46 
19 October 2006  
THE DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE 
Meeting Date: 19 October 2006 
 
 
Committee Members Present at the Meeting   
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, 
Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (Committee) has decided  to  keep  short-
term interest rates (policy rates)  unchanged in the Inter-bank Money Market and 
the Istanbul Stock Exchange Repo-Reverse Repo Market as fo llows: 
a. Overnight Interest Rates:  The overnight borrowing interest rate is 17.50 
percent, and the overnight lending interest rate is 22.50 percent, 
b. Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates:  Within the framework of the Late 
Liquidity Window Facility, the overnight borrowing i nterest rate valid between 4:00 
p.m. – 4:30 p.m. in the Inter-bank Money Market is 13.50 percent, while the lending 
interest rate is 25.50 percent, 
c. The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealer banks via repo transactions within the framework of 
open market transactions is 21.50 percent. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee considers that, the infla tion outlook of the 
last month did not change significantly compared to the previous period. Leading 
indicators confirm our earlier conjecture of a moderate slow down in aggregate 
demand. While the private sector demand indicators are pointing to a significant 
slowdown, the foreign demand remains relatively strong , though not as much as 
envisaged before. The improvement in inflation expect ations continues. However, 
the factors such as the continued presence of a gap between  the medium-term 
inflation expectations and the targets, the emergence o f new risks related to 
services prices and the continuation of uncertainties in th e global economy 
necessitate the monetary policy to remain cautious in the  medium term.   
In light of these developments, the Committee perceive s that maintaining 
the cautious stance is necessary for the inflation rate to converge to the 2007 year-
end targets. The Committee closely monitors the lagged effects of the monetary 
tightening that has been carried out since June. In addi tion, the impact of the 
incomes policy and the non-interest public sector expendit ures on the 2007 
inflation are closely monitored as well. The CBRT will  not hesitate to tighten 
monetary policy, in case developments with unfavorable effects on medium-term 
inflation outlook are observed.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion on inflation 
outlook will lead the Committee to revise its future st ance.  
A brief summary of the evaluations of the Committee w ill be released within 
five working days. 