No: 2006-45 
09 October 2006  
 
 SUMMARY OF MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE 
DISCUSSIONS 
Meeting Date: 26 September 2006 
 
 
Inflation Developments 
1. The recent deceleration in the rate of increases in price s of the items such 
as energy, unprocessed food, alcoholic beverages-tobacco and  gold, 
which had played a significant role in the rise in infl ation in the previous 
year, has affected the annual inflation figures favora bly. In August, annual 
inflation rate declined to 10.26 percent. One of the determinants of this 
development has been the removal of the impact of the  price increases in 
tobacco products that had been experienced in the same pe riod of the 
previous year. Moreover, the continuance of the partia l correction in 
unprocessed food prices strengthens the view that the high  price 
increases observed in the food group during the last 12- months mainly 
originated from supply-oriented factors.  
2. The annual rate of increase of the price index that is calculated by 
excluding energy, unprocessed food, alcoholic beverages, t obacco 
products and gold continued to increase in August. The la gged effects of 
exchange rate movements had played an important role in this rising 
trend. Although the prices of fuel oil, gold and techn ology-intensive 
imported products declined in August along with the app reciation of the 
New Turkish Lira (YTL), the unfavorable lagged effects of the fluctuations 
experienced in May and June on prices are still observabl e, albeit at a 
slower pace for many products. Meanwhile, the increases in  prices of the 
durable goods that accelerated considerably after May slo wed down 
significantly in August, as it had been foreseen in the previous 
announcement regarding the summary of Monetary Policy Committee 
(Committee) discussions.  
3. The Committee members consider that it would be helpfu l to prepare the 
public in advance for likely fluctuations in inflation i n the upcoming months. 
It is expected that the decline in prices of petroleum p roducts and gold will 
make a favorable contribution to consumer inflation in September. On the 
other hand, there might be a temporary increase in in flation in October. 
The studies conducted by the Central Bank indicate that e specially the 
prices of processed food are likely to display high increase s in the month 
of Ramadan. For the current year, it is calculated that  the effect of Ramadan will be quite visible in October inflation. A nalyzing the mentioned 
effect along with other seasonal factors, it is foreseen t hat inflation is likely 
to be realized high temporarily in October. 
4. In the recent period, annual price increases in the servi ces group declined, 
albeit in a limited manner. The most significant declin e was observed in 
transportation services that were mostly affected by the developments in 
oil prices. Annual price increases in the rents and the re staurants and 
hotels group maintain their high levels by displaying a similar course to 
that of the previous year.  The annual price increases in these groups are 
expected to lose pace in the upcoming period along with  the slow down in 
domestic demand.  
 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
5. The recently released data related to the factors affect ing inflation indicate 
that the partial improvement in the inflation outlo ok has continued. Leading 
indicators confirm our earlier conjecture that total dem and would slow 
down, albeit not as significantly. The fact that the in dustrial production 
displayed a rapid increase in July, while, the amount o f stock of 
manufactured goods, one of the Business Tendency Survey ( BTS) 
indicators, has risen at the same time indicates that expe ctations 
regarding the demand conditions are not very strong. T he decline in the 
capacity utilization in the manufacturing industry in Ju ly and August, as 
well as the ongoing slowdown in consumer credits and the contraction in 
demand for money further support this interpretation.   
6. While the upward trend in interest rates reduces the de mand for credits, 
weakened risk appetite and contraction in excess liquidity in the market 
limit the credit supply. Currently available data on consumer credits and 
confidence indices, as well as sales of automobiles and whit e goods, 
indicate that there is a decline in demand for commodit y groups, which 
have a high degree of pass-through from the exchange r ates to the prices, 
such as consumer durables and for sectors that are highly susce ptible to 
financing conditions like the housing sector. Meanwhile, t he leading 
indicators related to the consumption do not reveal a si gnificant slowdown 
in demand for semi-durable and durable goods.  
7. While the indicators related to the domestic demand rev eal a notable 
slowdown, foreign demand pursues a relatively strong cou rse. The 
continuance of the partial rise in productivity and susta ined global 
economic activity underpins the rise in exports. The fact that the rise in 
exports supports the economic activities turns out to be a factor limiting the 
slowdown in total demand. 8. The rate of increase in investments that experienced a sl owdown due to 
the changes in financing conditions and the upsurge in th e relative prices 
of investments is expected to maintain this trend in the  short run. As a 
matter of fact, deceleration is noteworthy in the incre ase in machinery-
equipment production, imports of capital goods and dome stic sales of 
heavy commercial vehicles along with the production of t he non-metallic 
minerals sector, providing intermediate input for the construction sector.  
  
9. Despite these developments, no serious deterioration is o bserved in the 
medium- term investment tendency. There has not been a  significant 
decline in the next twelve month-investment expenditu re tendency, one of 
the BTS indicators. Given that demand uncertainty is th e most important 
factor restricting investment expenditures, the continuan ce of the course of 
the next twelve month-demand expectations, one of the  BTS indicators, in 
favor of those that consider the capacity level inadequa te compared to the 
expected demand over the next twelve months, indicate that firms 
perceive the recent environment of uncertainty as tempo rary and that 
expectations for demand in the medium term are not pe ssimistic. The 
confidence in the economy resulting from the sustained bu dget discipline 
and strong course of the long-term credit inflows and th e direct capital 
investments are all considered to be the factors that rest rain further 
deterioration in investment tendency. 
10. Rapid increase in productivity of the manufacturing ind ustry and the 
resulting decline observed in unit labor costs, continued in the second 
quarter of the year as well.  As for the third quarte r, no significant change 
is expected in employment in this sector; however the in crease in 
productivity is forecasted to maintain its high level de spite the slight 
decline compared to the second quarter. In this context, productivity 
increases are expected to continue in the third quarter of the year as well.  
11. The increases in relative labor productivity mainly stem s from capital 
deepening parallel to the strong course of investments i n recent years. In 
this framework, the continuation of reforms for the imp rovement of the 
investment environment bears critical importance for the  increase in 
productivity and competitiveness, thereby achieving long -term lasting 
gains in fighting against inflation.  
12. Wage increases in the overall economy stand as another sig nificant 
development in terms of the medium-term tendency of t otal demand and 
unit costs. The Committee has evaluated the arrangement s in civil 
servants’ wages for the year 2007 in light of the medi um-term inflation 
outlook and reached the conclusion that the impact of thi s development on inflation expectations and other wage arrangements shou ld be monitored 
carefully.  
13. Along with this outlook regarding the labor costs, the e asing of oil and 
other commodity prices provides positive signals for the co ntinuation of the 
disinflation process as well. The possibility that the wor ld economy may 
decelerate gives the impression that the rapid increases i n commodity 
prices may stagnate. The developments in oil prices are e specially 
significant in terms of restraining the secondary effects o f energy costs, 
which have been increasing for a long time.  
14. In conclusion, when the overall supply and demand indica tors are 
evaluated together, it can be claimed that there is an  improvement in the 
medium-term inflation outlook to some extent, owing t o both the slowdown 
in total demand and the easing of real marginal costs.  
 
Risks 
15.  The improvement in medium-term inflation expectatio ns has continued in 
September. In general, the belief in the sustainabili ty of the disinflation 
process persists. However, the fact that medium-term infla tion 
expectations are significantly above the targets emerges as a risk factor in 
terms of wage and price setting. In particular, the ong oing high course of 
inflation expectations for the next two years is consider ed as a factor that 
should be monitored carefully.   
16. International liquidity conditions, which changed due t o the flight to quality 
effect in May and June, and increased risk perception, tri ggered the 
monetary tightening process in emerging market economies.  Recent 
analyses indicate that the risk of an unexpectedly rapid slowdown in the 
US economy in the medium term should not be ignored. In case such a 
risk materializes, the risk perception will increase in the  short term and 
fluctuations may be observed in the financial markets. Ho wever, since the 
foreign demand will significantly decline in the mediu m term in such an 
environment, the monetary tightening process in develo ping countries may 
stop or even reverse.  
 
Monetary Policy 
17. Within the context of these evaluations, the Committee  decided to keep 
the policy rates at its current level. Despite the slight ly more favorable 
inflation outlook, it is crucial to preserve the prudent  stance in the medium 
term perspective since the medium-term inflation expecta tions have not 
yet reached to the levels consistent with the targets and  the uncertainties 
regarding both commodity prices and international liqu idity conditions continue. The Committee believes that maintaining the  cautious stance is 
essential for the inflation rate to converge to the ta rgets at the end of the 
year 2007. Under such a policy perspective, the decline i n inflation is 
expected to be more apparent in the second quarter of 2007 and the 
inflation is expected to converge to the targets in the  medium-term. 
18. In the event of unfavorable developments, which might  adversely affect 
the medium-term inflation outlook, the Central Bank w ill not hesitate to opt 
for further tightening. The Committee defines furthe r tightening in two 
ways:  
a. In case of a development that might cause inflation to display long-
lasting deviations from the targets, the MPC might, in  line with the 
general framework of inflation targeting, change the policy rates. 
Although there was some improvement in the inflation outlook recently, 
the Committee considers it too early to rule out the p ossibility of further 
tightening. 
b. If an unexpected sudden and major fluctuation occurs i n the financial 
markets before the next MPC meeting that does not compl y with the 
economic principles short-term interest rates in the seconda ry markets 
could be allowed to materialize above 17.50, within the 17.50-21.50 
band. 
19. The Central Bank does not have the leverage to ease th e uncertainties 
regarding global imbalances. However, it seems possible t o ease the 
operational uncertainties related to the interest rate s resulting from the 
current liquidity conditions in the market. Within this framework, the 
Committee considers it beneficial to share with the publ ic the foresight that 
short-term interest rates will be realized at levels clo se to the borrowing 
rates of the Central Bank in the upcoming months. Consid ering both the 
evident slowdown in the demand for money and the Tre asury’s borrowing 
program, it seems highly possible that the excess liquidit y in the markets 
will continue. Thus, it is predicted that the o/n inter est rates in the money 
markets will stay close to the borrowing rates of the Cen tral Bank. In other 
words, the Central Bank, in principle, will not adhere  to the mechanism 
outlined in paragraph 18, article (b).  
20. The uncertainties related to the global economy will m ost probably remain 
on the agenda in the upcoming period as well. It shoul d be kept in mind 
that every step taken towards permanent macroeconomic stab ility would 
help the economy to overcome the adverse changes in the international 
conjuncture at minimum cost. In this context, the continua tion of the 
European Union accession process and the uninterrupted imp lementation 
of the structural reforms envisaged in the economic progr am as planned 
are crucial. Moreover, strict adherence to the budget li mits without resorting to adjustments in public prices and taxes is criti cal for achieving 
medium-term targets.  
  