No: 2006-43            
 September 07, 2006 
  
SUMMARY OF MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE 
DISCUSSIONS  
Meeting Date: 24 August 2006 
 
Inflation Developments  
1. While the Consumer Prices Index (CPI) increased by 0.85 percent in Jul y, 
annual inflation reached 11.69 percent. The lagged effects of the 
fluctuations in exchange rates in May and June on prices, the high increas es 
in food prices beyond the seasonal trend and the continuation of the 
unfavorable course of energy prices stood as the main determinants of hi gh 
inflation in July. While the increases in the prices of food and non-al coholic 
beverages group made up 0.39 percentage points of CPI inflation in July, 
increases in the energy prices accounted for 0.30 percentage points of 
monthly inflation. In previous reports and announcements it had been stated 
that the effects of exchange rates on inflation would be felt strongly . In this 
context, the rise in annual inflation in July is not considered as a sur prise by 
the Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee).  
2. In July, rapid increases in good prices continued. The rise in prices of the 
goods stemmed mainly from the high increases in unprocessed food prices 
since the last quarter of 2005, which results especially from the a dverse 
weather conditions. Besides, high increases in international oil prices  and 
other commodity prices as well as exchange rate developments became  
influential in the high course of inflation in the goods group.  
3. Price increases in the services group lost pace partially compar ed to the 
previous year. However, it is notable that high annual increases in pric es of 
rent, hotel-accommodation and transportation services continued. 
Considering the fact that rent contracts are generally indexed to pa st 
inflation, no significant deceleration is expected in rent increases in the 
short run. It is estimated that such a slowdown process will be obser ved 
with lag in the medium term. Meanwhile, prices of transportation ser vices 
follow a course parallel to that of oil prices.  
4. In July, all Special CPI Aggregates registered high increases. Annua l 
inflation of the CPI excluding energy, unprocessed food, alcoholic 
beverages, tobacco products and gold (SCA D*), which is calculated by 
excluding temporary factors in order to measure the general inflation trend, continued to rise mainly due to the lagged effects of exchange rate 
movements on durable goods.  
5. It is observed that the recent appreciation trend of the New Turkish lira 
(YTL) led to a significant slowdown in the rate of increase in pri ces of 
durable goods in August. Moreover, it is expected that certain groups such 
as fuel oil and gold, which are directly affected by exchange rates, will push 
down the consumer prices index in August. As a result of these 
developments and also in line with the disappearance of the impact of pr ice 
increases in tobacco products on annual inflation, which was experienced in 
the same period of last year, annual inflation may decline in August.  
 
Factors Affecting Inflation  
6. Recently available data have confirmed our earlier conjecture that  economic 
activity would slow down, albeit not as significantly, in the second half  of 
2006 due to sluggish domestic demand. In the recent period, increases in 
relative prices of goods with a high imported component and the rise in 
credit interest rates are affecting demand for durable goods unfavorabl y.  In 
July, consumer confidence indices continued to fall in line with the decl ine 
in the tendency of spending on houses, automobiles  and other durable 
goods.  The downward trend in credits continued in August as well. 
Liquidity shortages in the market, rises in interest rates and the  decline in 
banks’ appetites to extend credits will continue to restrain the incr ease in 
credits. Meanwhile, indicators related to the volume of sales in the  domestic 
goods market and the expectations regarding the new orders coming from 
the domestic market for the next three months, collected as part of the 
Business Tendency Survey (BTS), maintained the upward trend in July, 
which was first experienced in June following the rapid decline observed in 
May. This development encourages the belief that the unfavorable effect s of 
fluctuations in May and June on the general consumption tendency may be 
temporary.  
7.  No significant deterioration is observed in the indicators related to the 
investment demand. Imports of capital goods decreased in June due to 
foreign exchange rate movements. Nevertheless, production volume in the 
machinery-equipment, electrical machinery and office equipment sect ors 
increased in the same period. Moreover, one of the BTS indicators, the 
investment tendency over the next 12 month-period increased in July and 
August following the slump in June. These developments support our 
projections that the unfavorable impact of fluctuations in May on 
investment would be limited. The sustained high production level in the 
non-metallic minerals sector, which provides raw materials to the  
construction sector, point to the fact that despite the slowdown in housing loans, the strong investment tendency in the construction sector continues 
thanks to the already started projects.  
8. The rapid increase in exports fuelled by the sustained vigorous economic 
activity in Europe positively affects the performance of the manufa cturing 
industry. It is forecasted that the manufacturing industry production would 
grow at a high pace in July just as it did in June. It is estimate d that annual 
growth in industrial production will slightly decrease as of August. 
9. The continued rise in relative labor productivity in the manufacturing 
industry keeps restricting the unit labor costs. There is no significa nt decline 
in the investment tendency yet, and this can be considered as a favorabl e 
development with respect to the course of the productivity in the medium 
run.  
10.  To sum up, factors such as the continuation of the rise in investor 
confidence in July; the continued rising tendency in consumption items 
other than motor vehicles and housing; the improved expectations for 
domestic sales and orders over the next three months; and the strong fore ign 
demand all indicate that the slowdown in total demand might be limited.  
 
Risks and Monetary Policy 
11. The effects of the measures taken in June on demand-pull inflation wi ll start 
to take effect towards the end of the year and will become more a pparent by 
the first quarter of 2007.  Since the impact of monetary policy decis ions on 
inflation manifests itself after a certain period of time, the  Central Bank 
needs to act with a medium-term perspective. However, the economic uni ts’ 
tendency to behave in a short-term perspective due to the persistence of 
their past habits appears as a risk factor that could undermine the 
effectiveness of policy measures. It has been observed on several oc casions 
in the past that ascribing undue implications on a single month’s inflati on 
figure without deep analyzes of the outlook of factors affecting inflat ion 
and the developments in the sub-items would increase fluctuations in the 
financial markets. It should be underlined once more that, rather than shor t-
term developments in inflation, the trends observed throughout an 18-month 
period perspective are important for monetary policy decisions.  
12. In August, the deterioration in medium-term inflation expectations ceas ed 
and moreover a slight improvement was experienced. Generally, it can be  
claimed that the survey participants expect a gradual decline in inf lation in 
the next two years. However, medium-term inflation expectations are 
significantly above the targets and this emerges as a risk factor  in setting 
wages and prices.  The Committee will keep a close eye on the expe ctations 
in the upcoming period and maintain its cautious stance until medium-term  
expectations of the economic units converge to the targets. It should be borne in mind that the continuity of fiscal discipline and structural r eforms 
is as important as monetary policy in terms of keeping the expectat ions 
under control.  
13. The Committee emphasizes that, in terms of attaining the 4-perce nt end-
2007 target, it is significantly crucial that the incomes policy mus t be 
pursued consistently with the program targets. Moreover, strict adherenc e to 
budget limits without resorting to adjustments in public prices and taxes  are 
critical for attaining medium-term targets. 
14. There are still uncertainties on the contribution of imported cost fa ctors to 
the disinflation process in the upcoming period. The volatile course of 
commodity prices at high levels influences the producer prices. Even if  the 
relative slowdown in demand is expected to ease the pass-through effect  
from producer prices to consumer prices, developments in this area are  still 
being closely monitored. 
15. Recently, international liquidity conditions displayed a relatively f avorable 
course. The fact that US growth and inflation figures were realize d below 
the expectations and thus FED suspended interest rate hikes, has increa sed 
the perception that the monetary tightening cycle has come to an end, and 
which in turn, reduced volatility in emerging markets. Owing to these 
developments, the risk premium indicators for the Turkish economy have 
improved moderately. Nevertheless, the picture as to the inflation ri sks in 
the USA and whether the FED would deem additional tightening necessary 
or not are not yet clear. Besides, even if the monetary tightening in 
developed countries comes to an end, it will not necessarily imply tha t the 
global uncertainties have disappeared. Recent analyses point out the fac t 
that the risk of slowdown in the US economy should not be disregarded. 
Under the scenario that this development could happen earlier than 
expected, it can be anticipated that global economic uncertainties wil l 
persist.  
16. In line with the assessments above, the Committee perceives that the 
medium-term inflation outlook has become slightly more favorable 
compared to the previous month. However, there is still need to remain 
cautious for inflation because oil and other commodity prices are sti ll 
increasing and the expectations are not yet in line with the medium-t erm 
targets.  
17. In the previous Inflation Report, it was stated that a measured monet ary 
tightening might be necessary in the second half of the year in order t o be 
able to achieve the target for 2007. Committee members made the 
evaluation that it was still early to signal that the additional monetary 
tightening is over. Accordingly, they reached a consensus that in case of 
developments that may adversely affect the medium-term inflation outlook; the Central Bank would not hesitate – as stated in earlier announceme nts 
and reports – to opt for further tightening. Within this framework, the 
Committee concluded that maintaining the cautious stance for a while was 
essential for converging to the targets at the end of the year 2007. What  is 
meant by “cautious” stance here is a stance where the Central Bank adheres 
to its tight monetary policy and is responsive to even the slightest ne gative 
development in terms of medium-term inflation.  
18. Following the decisions made on June 25, the excess YTL liquidity in the 
market decreased significantly, and hence liquidity conditions tightened. 
The actual level of excess liquidity mopped up by the Central Bank in t he 
o/n market allows the monetary policy to be conducted more flexibly and 
effectively in the period between two subsequent Committee meetings . 
Until the next MPC meeting, short-term interest rates are fore seen to 
materialize within the 17.50-21.50 band, close to the Central Bank lending 
rate of 17.50. However, in case of any extraordinary fluctuations in the 
markets, the short-term interest rates could be allowed to mater ialize above 
17.50, as long as they remain within the 17.50-21.50 band.  
19. Along with all these factors, the continuation of reforms that would enha nce 
the competition and investment environment and thus, bolster productivity 
increases in the long run, is still of vital importance. In this conte xt, the 
continuation of the European Union accession process, and the 
uninterrupted implementation of the structural reforms envisaged in the 
economic program as planned are crucial. The continuation of the 
determined steps taken in recent years in this context will help t he economy 
to overcome the adverse changes in the international conjuncture with 
minimum cost.   