No: 2006-54 
 
          21  December 2006 
THE DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: 21 December 2006 
 
Committee Members Participated in the Meeting 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, 
Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (Committee) has decided to keep short-term 
interest rates (policy rates) unchanged in the Inter-bank Money Market and the 
Istanbul Stock Exchange Repo-Reverse Repo Market as follows: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: The overnight borrowing inte rest rate is 17.50  percent, 
and the overnight lending interest rate is 22.50  percent, 
b)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Within the fra mework of the Late Liquidity 
Window Facility, the overnight borrowing interest rate  valid between                        
4:00 p.m. – 4:30 p.m. in the Inter-bank Money Market is 13.50  percent, while the 
lending interest rate is 25.50  percent, 
c)  The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity borrowing facilities provided 
for primary dealer banks via repo transactions within the  framework of open market 
transactions is 21.50  percent. 
 
The Committee considers that the recent data is broadly consistent with the 
outlook presented in the October Inflation Report.  The slowdown in total demand 
continues as expected. While the private sector demand indi cators point to a 
significant slowdown, the foreign demand remains relati vely strong. Nevertheless, the 
tight monetary policy should continue due to factors such as the gap between the 
medium-term inflation expectations and the targets, the  risks related to the services 
price inflation and the uncertainties in the global eco nomy. Moreover, the Committee 
judges that inflation risks regarding the unprocessed food  prices remain. 
In light of these developments, the Committee assesses that  meeting the 
medium term inflation targets would necessitate the mai ntenance of the cautious 
policy stance. The Committee closely monitors the lagged effects of the monetary 
tightening since June. Moreover, the potential impact of  the progress in the structural 
reform agenda and the developments in the incomes policy  as well as the non-interest 
public sector expenditures on the inflation and the infl ation expectations are carefully 
evaluated. The CBRT will not hesitate to tighten mone tary policy in case of any new 
developments that would have unfavorable effects on the m edium-term inflation 
outlook.  
 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to inflation 
outlook will lead the Committee to reconsider its stance.  
  
A brief summary of the assessments of the Committee will be released within 
five working days. 