 1 
 
 
 
 
Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey 
 
 
 
 
 
    FAREWELL SPEECH  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Süreyya Serdengeçti 
 
 
 
 
 
14 March 2006, Ankara 
 
 
  2Dear Members of the Central Bank,  
As of today, I bid farewell to my working life of twenty-six yea rs at the Central Bank of 
Turkey, where I started as an officer in 1980, gradually working my  way through all echelons, 
before finally serving as the Governor for the last five year s.  
So, to put it in a nutshell, I am leaving behind the title of “Gove rnor of the Central Bank”, 
which I have carried with great honor, and taking on that of “Former G overnor of the Central 
Bank”, which is equally prestigious and which I will also carry w ith honor throughout my life.  
Distinguished Members of the Central Bank,  
At this very significant turning point in my life, I would like to share with you some 
observations and experiences I have had during my career.  
Since its establishment, the Central Bank of Turkey has always assumed a leading role, either 
directly or indirectly, in both Turkey’s economic and social life.   
To me personally, one of the most crucial aspects of these leading  roles has been to ensure 
public awareness regarding the importance of institutionalization and the concept of 
institutional identity, which guarantees not only the success of polic y actions, but also 
credibility and confidence.  
In this sense 2001 was a significant turning point. Law No.4651 brought inst rument 
independence to the Central Bank,  and the  achievement and maintenance of price stability 
were set as the primary objectives of the Bank. With this leg al framework, the concepts of 
independence and independent institution  were clearly introduced to the public for the first 
time. It is self-evident that the existence of a legal fra mework is crucial for independence and 
institutional identity, which is extremely difficult to achieve,  to put it into action and to 
maintain. However, it should be kept in mind that essentially it i s the employees of an 
institution and the policies in place that set the wheels in motion a nd make the legal 
framework function. In this respect, during the past five year per iod we have been together, 
having undergone economic and political turbulences from time to time, and furthermore 
being subject to praise as well as criticism, the confidence a nd credibility of the Bank has 
been boosted to the highest levels both domestically and internationally  as a result of our  3unswerving consistent stance and determined policies. One of the mai n factors underlying this 
success is our long-sighted perspective, which we have developed fr om the start of this whole 
process, by avoiding the short-term considerations that were entrenc hed in all areas in our 
country as a result of the environment created by decades of suffer ing from chronic inflation.  
Dear Colleagues,  
Turkey has experienced a lot of firsts in her history in the period f rom 2001 till today. 
Inflation targets have been met for four years consecutively and single digit inflation figures, 
totally unknown to younger generations, have finally been attained after  30 years. As of 2006, 
our monetary policy is now being shaped within the framework of a medium -term strategy 
and “Inflation Targeting Regime” with a view to achieving and m aintaining price stability, 
rather than disinflation policies. A strong infrastructure, high le vel of knowledge and 
appropriate institutional organization are needed to implement the Infl ation Targeting 
Regime, which is a contemporary monetary policy regime. We ar e proud to be able to say that 
to this end, significant intra-organizational changes have been made  in the Bank over time, 
and its  technical infrastructure has been strengthened. Consequently, we started to publish 
two very important reports entitled the “Financial Stability Re port” and the “Inflation 
Report”. These reports assess the general course of the economy i n depth, provide  detailed 
analyses relating to the financial sector, by adopting  a more f orward-looking and medium-
term perspective.  
Another key ‘first’ in this period was Monetary Reform that had not been achieved for several 
years, and the removal of six zeros from the Turkish lira. The w hole operation, which was 
extremely comprehensive, involving a number of technical and administ rative details, as well 
as having international repercussions, was carried out smoothly and per fectly due to the 
experience and painstaking efforts of the related departments. As y ou all know, Monetary 
Reform is not limited to the removal of zeros from our currency. It also reaffirms that the 
success achieved in the fight against inflation is a lasting one , as well as the reflection of this 
success on the daily lives of  Turkish people. Monetary Reform, whi ch is mainly implemented 
through the coordination and organization of the Central Bank, sets an exampl e for other 
countries that are currently undergoing similar experiments.   4Possessing a straightforward and transparent communication policy wa s one of the most 
significant elements of the past five year period, characteriz ed by a process of structural 
change in Turkey during which time the Bank’s policies have helped, ac celerated or initiated 
this process from time to time. It was significant not only in t erms of achievements, but also 
in terms of the continuation and furthering of these achievements.  
In this respect, the communication policy pursued by the Central Bank dur ing the last five 
years within the framework of modern central banking is another ‘fir st’ in terms of our Bank 
and Turkey. Having a clear line of communication with all sections of the public, explaining 
the policies, their rationale, their benefits and costs in an open, straightforward and confident 
manner are not only a pre-condition for the success of the policies, but are also conducive to 
the attainment of the cost-effective targets. I am delighte d to be able to say that our 
communication policy, based on the sound principle of constantly conveying ac curate 
information as responsible central bankers, is the most prominent fac tor among those 
underlying the confidence and prestige we have gained during this proces s.  
As Mr. Emir Sencer, who is the oldest central banker living at  present, said during my visit to 
him: “Be honest, then you will never lose your prestige” . 
Distinguished Members of the Central Bank,  
Together, we have attained a number of “firsts” during the past f ive years. Today, we have 
come to the end of time we have spent together. However, I would l ike you to know that, as 
central bankers, it rests in the hands of each and every one of you t o preserve the prestige and 
confidence we have achieved as an Institution.  
Strive to do your best in the duty you have undertaken, try to put somethi ng of yourself into 
the job you are doing, take pains to progress, and be open to innovations. Whate ver subject 
you are dealing with, always benefit from the light of knowledge w hile forming your 
opinions, keep abreast of what is going on around the world. Always remem ber that it is the 
importance attached to young people and to education that will shape the f uture of an 
institution. And never ever forget that the only genuine guide in lif e is that of science.   5As my late uncle Şeref Serdengeçti said: “W hatever you are meant to do in your life, do it 
properly, and whatever you want to be, be it fully. ”1   
I am confident that, you, who are destined to achieve numerous success es from now on, will 
always stay on the path leading to the contemporary civilization dr awn by the great leader 
Atatürk for our country, to your Institutional identity and to the principl es of modern central 
banking.  
Dear Members of the Central Bank,  
For Turkey to reach lasting economic stability and sustainable grow th, I have one request, I 
ask you to give the same level of support to your next Governor as you have provided to me 
so far.  
Once again I wish to extend my gratitude to you, and to all those who have pulled their weight 
during these five tough years.  
Last but not least, distinguished members of the central bank, it i s often said that there is a 
woman behind every successful man. In my case, I have been lucky e nough to have two 
companions, not behind me, but at my side: Let me thank, in your presence , two more 
members of our community, my wife Çi ğdem and my son Deniz.  
 
Süreyya Serdengeçti 
Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey 
Governor 
                                                
1 Ahmet Cemal, “ Şeref Bey Artık Burada Ya şamıyor”, Can Yayınları, İstanbul 1999 