Number: 2006- 10        7 March 2006 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE DISCUSSION S  
Meeting Date: 23 February 2006 
 
 
Inflation Developments 
Price increments in tobacco prices, a rise in the transportation a nd housing group 
indices due to the developments in energy prices and price increases in the food group due to 
seasonal effects were the factors that had an adverse effect on inflation in January.  
Meanwhile, the seasonal decline in clothing prices continued. As a res ult, the CPI 
developments being in line with expectations, CPI increased by 0.75 perce ntage points 
compared to the previous month. Since the rise in question is higher compar ed to January 
2005, annual inflation increased to reach 7.93 compared to the previous month. As t his had 
already been foreseen by the Central Bank, it was asserted that January inflation figures did 
not necessitate a significant change in the stance towards the m edium-term perspective of 
monetary policy. 
As the VAT cuts on food, health and education sectors made in early 2005 ha d curbed 
price increases, price increments in the mentioned groups might be hi gher in February 
compared to the same period last year. In other words, a slight incr ease in inflation in 
February would not be a surprise. 
In January, the outlook of the special CPI aggregates has been positi ve. Even if an 
upward trend was observed in the special CPI aggregates in the pre vious month, generally a 
downward trend has prevailed in the last eight months and this points to t he fact that the 
downward trend in inflation continues. Hence, inflation expectations continued to improve in 
the first two months of the year as well. By the second half of F ebruary 2006, the expected 
inflation over the next 12 months is 5.45 percent, which is very close to t he path that is 
consistent with the medium-term target.  
Producer prices maintained the favorable course. Manufacturing industry prices, when 
calculated by excluding petroleum and tobacco products, inched up by a mere 0.21 percent in 
January and this development is perceived as being positive.  
Services prices continue to be a risk factor with respect to att aining the inflation target 
for 2006. Moreover, as the share of services groups in the consumer price index has been 
increased while updating the consumer price index for 2006, the mentioned ri sks have further 
increased. It is observed that the short of supply in the housing sector in the last few years 
exerts an extra seasonal pressure on inflation through items rela ted to housing prices. The 
rapid rises in the prices of the sub-groups susceptible to housing price s (rents, restaurants-
hotels, consumer durables) observed recently verify this idea. Meanwhil e, even if the rate of 
increase in rents, which decreased to 1.31 percent in January 2006 from 1.90 pe rcent in 
January 2005, can be accepted as a favorable development, it is yet too e arly to suggest that 
this downward movement will become a trend. 
Short-term forecasts made in the light of these evaluations indica te that annual 
inflation will slightly increase in the first quarter of 2006, but s tart declining again from the 
second quarter onwards. What is important for monetary policy is the c onsistency between the medium-term inflation trend and the targets. Therefore, evaluating e lements such as supply 
and demand developments, productivity and costs is very important. 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
The sales figures pertaining to the last quarter of 2005 and development s in 
consumption indices and consumer tendency surveys contain signals that consum ption 
demand, especially the demand for consumer durables, is stable. Although a  slow-down was 
observed in demand and production indicators in January, this slow-down is conside red to 
stem from the decline in the number of working days caused by the long religious holiday. 
Nevertheless, quarterly trends of the indicators in the Business Te ndency Survey, which 
include production, domestic market sales and orders and volume of current w ork, are 
observed to maintain their favorable course. Furthermore, according to the  Manufacturing 
Industry Tendency Survey data, proportion of the firms, which cited the la ck of demand in the 
domestic market as one of the reasons that impede their full capacity, continued to decl ine.  
The rapid growth trend of investments continued in the last period. Accordi ng to 
seasonally adjusted data, increases in the production of machinery-equipm ent, office 
machinery and electrical machinery and appliances sectors continued in the last quarter of 
2005. In the same period, the data pertaining to domestic sales of comme rcial vehicles and 
imports of capital goods also point to the revival in investments. Meanw hile, the distortion 
observed in the data pertaining to economic activity in January, was r eflected on the 
investment tendency for the next 12-month data in the Business Tendency S urvey. However, 
as the said indicator is still at a high level compared to the a chieved level, the investment 
tendency is deemed to maintain a strong course. As a result of the macroeconomic stability 
that increased in recent years, long-term interest rates conti nued to decline gradually and the 
New Turkish lira retained its strong position. These two factors unde rpin the revival in 
investments. These developments ensure the continuation of the increases in partial  
productivity, as well. There is no doubt that what is important for the sustainability of the 
increases in productivity is the increase in total factor  productivity. In this respect, the 
continuation of structural regulations such as the enhancement of competi tiveness and 
amelioration of the investment environment are of great importance.  
Industrial production maintains its stable trend. The Real Sector Conf idence Index 
maintained its high level despite its downward movement in January. Me anwhile, the capacity 
utilization rates being at relatively lower levels compared to the previous year, limits the 
effects of the revival in the economy on prices. Considering that the increase in production 
capacity continued throughout 2005, a similar outlook is also foreseen in the upcoming 
period.  
Another significant point related to the developments in January is the  annual decline 
in exports. However, when excluded from the calendar effects such as seasonality and 
working days, it is observed that exports increased annually. Furthermor e, the continuation of 
the positive course of the expectations that are mentioned in the Busi ness Tendency Survey 
for the volume of the goods to be sold to foreign markets and the amount of new orders 
coming from the export market in the upcoming quarter, and the leading i ndicators announced 
for February, indicate that the increase in foreign demand will cont inue, albeit with a slow-
down compared to previous years.   
Although consumer loans maintain their high levels, their annual rates of increase, 
excluding housing credits, displayed a stable trend in the last period. This is considered as an 
indicator of the stability of the increase in domestic demand. There  is no doubt that the 
increases in housing credits, which stemmed from structural facto rs, might continue in the 
upcoming years. Moreover, the rapid declines observed in credit interest  rates in the past year, are expected to continue to underpin both consumer and corporate credits. The results of the 
Banks Loans Tendency Survey for the last quarter of 2005 indicate that t he increase in the 
demand for consumer credits and especially for housing credits will continue. In this context, 
rapid credit expansion is considered as a development that should be monitor ed closely in 
terms of both price and financial stability.  
To sum up, the evaluations regarding supply and demand conditions, point to the fa ct 
that the stagnation observed in January stemmed from the seasonal fa ctors and that the 
increase in total demand maintains its stable course. The continuance  of productivity increases 
in line with the investment-based growth  restricts cost pressures. Meanwhile, it is anticipated 
that the support of supply and demand conditions to the downward trend in inflati on will be 
limited in the upcoming period compared to previous years.  
Developments in crude oil prices stood as the leading factor in term s of production 
costs. In recent months, continuation of the unforeseen volatility in oil pr ices confirms that oil 
prices remain as a significant risk factor in terms of the a chievability of the inflation target for 
2006. Moreover, the fact that the International Metal Prices Index re gistered high increases on 
an annual basis constitutes another risk factor. Despite of all thes e unfavorable developments 
in international raw material prices, the strong position of the Ne w Turkish lira helped restrain 
the increases in input costs in the recent period.  
The risks for the inflation outlook arising from likely fluctuations i n international 
liquidity conditions and global risk appetite are always present. His torically low long-term 
interest rates in developed countries in recent years led to the f low of international funds 
particularly to developing countries that made significant progress towards stability, such as 
Turkey. In case of a reversal in these trends, fluctuations may occ ur in the financial markets. 
Although recently the stance of both the European Central Bank and the Fe deral Reserve 
provide some signals for the continuation of this trend for quite a while , it is a fact that global 
trends may change very quickly. The financing structure of the current  account deficit has 
tended to grow stronger recently, which means that the resilience to fluctuations in 
international liquidity conditions started to increase. Nevertheless, sustaining the structural 
adjustments in a determined manner and the continuance of implementations  that would 
encourage direct capital inflow are still critical in terms of medium and long -term perspective. 
 
Monetary Policy  
In the light of the developments summarized above, the Monetary Policy Committee 
has concluded that, although there seem to be favorable developments in some  cost factors, 
the data announced recently on inflation and economic activity do not signif icantly change the 
outlook elaborated in the Inflation Report. The forecasts indicate that the disinflation process, 
coming to a halt in the first quarter of 2006, will resume in the se cond quarter. Despite this 
downward trend, in light of current data, end-year inflation is more li kely to be above the 
point target of 5 percent rather than below. The cautious approach of monet ary policy should 
be maintained due to the continuation of price rigidities in the servic e sector, the reduction of 
the support of supply and demand conditions to disinflation, and the continued risks related to 
the costs of raw materials. On the other hand, the decrease in the risk premium has been noted 
and is being monitored with a view to assessing whether it is going  to be permanent or 
temporary. 
As a result of these evaluations, Monetary Policy Committee deci ded to keep short-
term interest rates (policy rates)  applied at the CBRT Interbank Money Market and the 
Istanbul Stock Exchange Repo-Reverse Repo Market unchanged at the meet ing dated 23 
February 2006.  In the light of currently available information, policy rates are less likely to increase, 
rather than remain stable or decrease in the medium-term. In the near-term, however, the 
likelihood of policy rates to remain stable seems to have been less ened somewhat since the 
last meeting. This policy perspective will ensure that inflation is in line with the target path 
around mid-2007. On the other hand, it should be emphasized that any new data and 
information associated with the inflation outlook will compel the Moneta ry Policy Committee 
to potentially revise its stance about the future. 