No: 2006 - 3 
January 4, 2006 
   
PRESS RELEASE 
The interest rate on New Turkish Lira (YTL) require d reserves is decreased to 
10.12 percent, to be effective from January 4, 2006 .  
With the aim of contributing to the efficient and e ffective functioning of banks by 
alleviating their financial intermediation costs, Y TL required reserves and FX required 
reserves have begun to be remunerated starting from  8.8.2001 and from 24.5.2002 
respectively, in order to reduce the funding costs of required reserves maintained in the 
Central Bank of Republic of Turkey (CBRT) without b eing remunerated. 
The interest rate applied to YTL required reserves was decreased to 10.25 percent with 
a cut of 0.75 percentage points to be effective fro m 24.05.2005 and it was announced that the 
interest rate applied to YTL required reserves is t o be held in the range between 75 and 80 
percent of the simple weighted average interest rat e for YTL denominated deposits and 
determined in line with the changes in interest rat es applied by banks on deposits. 
On the other hand, the European Central Bank (ECB) and national central banks of 
some EU member countries take their policy interest  rates into consideration in remunerating 
required reserves. The harmonization of financial m arkets with European Union (EU) 
implementations has gained importance in the access ion process of Turkey to the EU. Within 
this framework, in the determination of interest ra te on YTL required reserves, instead of 
interest rate applied by banks on YTL deposits, the  CBRT overnight borrowing interest rate, 
which is determined within the context of monetary policy objectives and macroeconomic 
developments, shall be taken into consideration hen ceforth.  In this respect, by taking into 
account the balance sheet and monetary policy of th e CBRT, it is decided that the interest rate 
on YTL required reserves is to be determined as 75 percent of overnight borrowing interest 
rate of the CBRT. 
Consequently, this will help narrow the gap between  the short-term interest rates and 
long-term interest rates and support the establishm ent of a more effective monetary 
transmission mechanism in 2006, when Inflation Targ eting regime is being implemented. 
 Therefore, to be effective from January 4, 2006, i nterest rate on required reserves is 
determined as 10.12 percent, constituting 75 percen t of overnight borrowing interest rate of 
the CBRT, which is currently set at 13.5 percent. A bovementioned interest rate shall 
hereinafter be recalculated in the same way when ov ernight borrowing interest rate of the 
CBRT is changed and also shall be announced on the CBRT website under the section “Data-
Banking Data- Interest Rate on YTL Required Reserve s”. As before, the interest rate applicable to FX requi red reserves, which is equivalent to 
the interest rate on 2-day notice FX deposits that banks hold as free deposits with the CBRT, 
shall continue to be determined weekly and to be an nounced in the same way. 
 