No: 2007-05 
        27 February 2007 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 15 February 2007 
 
 
 
Inflation Developments 
 
1. In January, consumer prices increased by 1% and the annual  inflation rate was 
9.93% with a rise mainly driven by unprocessed food price s edging up sharply 
in response to both export- and supply-related factors, w hile other prices did not 
reveal a negative outlook. 
2. Summary of the previous Monetary Policy Committee (the  Committee) meeting 
indicated that food prices continue to pose a risk on inf lation and developments 
in January’s inflation proved this to be true. Unprocessed  food prices recorded 
a historically high increase by 8.82% in January with an  annual price increase 
above 20% driven particularly by greenhouse food prices o n which the effects 
of increasing export facilities were also felt. Although in February a downward 
movement in the annual unprocessed food price inflation is likely, risks still 
remain a major concern. 
3. The downward trend in the annual rate of increase of goods prices excluding 
unprocessed food and energy continued as the new Turkish L ira strengthened 
and domestic demand slowed down. The annual inflation in this sub-group 
declined to 5.73%, reverting back to the figures in pre- May 2006 period. 
Likewise, most of the alternative core inflation indicato rs recorded lower annual 
figures.  Especially the decline in the annual rate of increase in special CPI 
Aggregate-H (CPI excluding energy, unprocessed food, liq uor, tobacco and 
gold) has become more evident.  
4. January inflation developments also pointed to the fact that the expected 
slowdown in services prices has not occurred yet. The annual rate of increase 
in transportation services prices decelerated in line with the developments in oil 
prices, whereas elevating prices of rents and restaurants-ho tels continued to 
keep services inflation at high levels. 
5. Despite the rising food price inflation (under CPI), t he annual inflation in 
agriculture prices (under PPI) continued to decline, whi ch can be explained by 
the fact that most unprocessed foods pushing consumer prices u p by sharp 
rises in January were, in the same month, not included i n PPI.  6. In sum the rise in inflation in January did not change the medium term inflation 
outlook as it can be attributed to the developments in u nprocessed food prices. 
The moderation of energy and other commodity prices al ong with the 
disappearance of the base effect of exchange rate pass-thr ough may lead to a 
substantial decline in the annual inflation rate, start ing from the second quarter 
of 2007. Annual inflation may exhibit a downward move ment in February owing 
to a possible correction in unprocessed food prices and may display an upward 
movement in March in response to possible administered pri ce hikes. Yet, the 
disinflation trend will become more discernible starting  from the second quarter.  
 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
 
7. The Committee evaluates the recent data as broadly consist ent with the outlook 
presented in the Inflation Report: 
8. The slowdown in private consumer demand continues. Consume r credits, 
following a rapid expansion until mid 2006, slowed dow n significantly and, 
notwithstanding a temporary rise in December, resumed i ts slow growth trend in 
January. The same course of movement applied to monetary  indicators.  
9. Despite a slight recovery in the demand for durable goo ds during the last 
quarter of 2006, seasonally adjusted monthly automobil e sales fell in January, 
while sales of white goods did not display a noticeable change. Consumer 
Confidence Index (compiled jointly by Central Bank and TURKSTAT), and the 
CNBC-e Consumer Confidence Index did not show any signif icant changes, in 
January in seasonally adjusted terms. 
10.  Foreign demand remains relatively strong. In the course  of the fourth quarter of 
2006, the annual rate of increase of real exports prevai led over that of real 
imports. In this respect, net export demand is expected to continue its positive 
contribution to the GDP growth in the last quarter of  2006 as well.  Besides, the 
ongoing high rate of export growth in January and Feb ruary, as suggested by 
the Turkish Exporters’ Assembly figures, indicates that fore ign demand will 
continue to have a positive impact on growth. 
11. Industrial production, consistent with the outlook introd uced in the Inflation 
Report, displayed a slight recovery during the last quar ter of 2006. Seasonally 
adjusted industrial production decreased in December. Thi s development, 
however, is regarded as temporary when other economic in dicators are also 
taken into account. Business Tendency Survey (BTS) indicator s such as the 
amount of new orders received from domestic and internat ional markets and 
the volume of sold items for the next three months, and the expected growth  of 
production volume for the next three months do not poin t to any contraction in 
economic activity. 12. Machinery-and-equipment investments displayed a partial recovery in the fourth 
quarter of 2006 compared to the third quarter, which,  however, remained 
subdued considering the previous years. Production and imp orts in December 
and sales of commercial vehicles in January did not point t o a significant 
recovery in machinery-and-equipment investments. However, the increase in 
investment spending tendency- another BTS indicator - in  December signals a 
positive outlook for  medium-term investments. On the oth er hand, the ongoing 
rise in the non-metallic minerals production in December  indicated that the 
robust activity in construction sector continues. 
13. To sum up, the Committee judges that aggregate demand  conditions continue 
to support disinflation. Economic activity is projected to recover gradually in the 
upcoming period, while growth figures might be relati vely low in the second 
quarter of 2007, largely driven by base effects. 
14.  In addition, the Committee members noted that the b usiness days between 
October and January were quite variable – due to shifti ng holidays - compared 
to the same period of the previous year, which needs to be taken into account 
when making a solid assessment for economic activity. In this context, 
economic data of the upcoming period will be closely mon itored. 
15.  Recent developments indicate that productivity has continu ed to increase in 
manufacturing industry in the fourth quarter of 2006.  Moreover, the high non-
farm unemployment rate is expected to contain the upwar d pressures in unit 
labor costs. However, with inflation evidently above mid- term targets, 
developments in public incomes policy still play a crucial r ole in the disinflation 
process. 
16. Besides the contributions of aggregate demand and cost fa ctors to the 
disinflation process, the partial improvement in mid-ter m inflation expectations 
was maintained. Although January inflation development s led to a slight rise in 
the end-year inflation expectations, medium-term expecta tions continued to 
improve as of the first half of January.   
 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
17. Recently, albeit the unchanged CBT policy interest rate s, the returns on 
government securities displayed a significant decline, part icularly on the back of 
the change in risk perception and favorable internationa l liquidity conditions. 
The decline in the interest rates of bank loans, on the other hand, remained  
limited. The current high level of the bank loan rates continue to restrain credit 
demand. However, bank loans - especially the consumer credi ts - may re-boost 
in case the downward trend of credit interest rates gain s momentum.  
18. Inflation is expected to maintain its downward course in the upcoming period, 
converging to the targets in the medium run. Yet, severa l risks remain.  19. The main risk to the mid-term inflation outlook is the possibility of higher-than-
expected downward persistence in inflation, manifested la tely by the inertia in 
inflation expectations and services inflation. Although in flation expectations after 
worsening during the post-financial turbulence period i n mid-2006 have recently 
gained a positive outlook, medium-term expectations are st ill above the targets. 
Rigidity in services inflation continued in January. The slowdown in the overall 
economic activity is expected to contain the services inflation  after a while. 
However, given the backward-looking price setting behavior,  the sensitivity of 
services prices to wage hikes and structural factors, the possibi lity of sustained 
high services inflation remains as a risk. Materialization of such a risk would 
require maintaining the tight policy stance. 
20.  Another risk to the inflation outlook is the uncertaint y concerning the lagged 
effects of monetary policy on aggregate demand. The im pact of monetary 
tightening exercised since June 2006 on private demand has been noticeable 
recently. However, the size of economic slowdown and its e ffect on inflation still 
remain uncertain. Moreover, the ongoing uncertainties r elated to government 
spending constitute an upside risk to aggregate demand an d inflation. 
21. Waning risk appetite or a possible fluctuation in liquid ity conditions in global 
markets continue to pose a risk against the inflation outl ook. Recently, the 
perception on the US economy that risks between inflatio n and growth will 
remain on balance helped alleviate the uncertainties in  question. On the other 
hand, a higher-than-expected growth rate in Japan sugge sted further monetary 
tightening. Consequently, uncertainties related to glo bal liquidity conditions, 
notwithstanding a periodical fallback, continued to exist.  The Committee will 
react appropriately by revising the policy rates in case su dden changes in 
global liquidity conditions pose permanent challenges to  inflation outlook. 
22.  Developments related to international commodity prices have recently 
contributed to the inflation outlook. Metal prices conti nue to decline. Both the 
balanced growth of global economy and the current level  of oil stock foster the 
expectation that crude oil prices will not display sharp r ises in the upcoming 
period. However, it should be noted that projections fo r commodity prices 
involve substantial uncertainty and therefore they need to be assessed as a risk 
factor under current circumstances. 
23. In light of these developments, the Committee decided t o keep the policy rates 
on hold. The Committee has assessed that meeting the med ium term inflation 
targets requires the maintenance of the cautious policy st ance. The gap 
between medium-term inflation expectations and targets,  the risks to services 
prices inflation and the uncertainties in global economy  necessitate keeping a 
tight policy stance. 
24. The Committee closely monitors the lagged effects of the  monetary tightening 
since June 2006. Moreover, the potential impact of the p rogress in the structural reform agenda and developments in incomes policy as well as public sector 
non-interest expenditures on inflation and inflation e xpectations are carefully 
evaluated. The Central Bank will not hesitate to tight en monetary policy in case 
of any new developments that would adversely affect the medium-term inflation 
outlook. 
25.  The continuation of the European Union accession process a nd the sustained 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged in th e economic program 
remain of critical concern. Developments in structural refo rms that would 
enhance the quality of fiscal discipline in the medium a nd long run are closely 
followed both in terms of macroeconomic stability and pr ice stability. Continued 
determination in implementing the decisive steps taken in  these areas in recent 
years will strengthen the resilience of the economy agai nst possible changes in 
the global conjuncture.  