No:2007-04 
          15 February 2007     
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: February 15, 2007 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, 
Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has deci ded to keep short-
term interest rates (policy rates) unchanged as follows: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 17.50  percent, and lending rate at 
22.50  percent, 
b)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate  applied between 4:00 p.m. – 
4:30 p.m. at 13.50  percent, lending rate at 25.50  percent, 
c)  The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity borrowing facilities provided 
for primary dealers via repo transactions at 21.50  percent. 
 
The Committee evaluates the recent data as broadly consist ent with the 
outlook presented in the Inflation Report. The rise in  inflation in January did not 
change the medium term inflation outlook as it can be a ttributed to developments in 
unprocessed food prices. Annual inflation may exhibit a d ownward movement in 
February due to a possible correction in unprocessed food prices and may have an 
upward movement in March owing to possible administered price hikes. Yet, the 
disinflation trend will become more discernible starting  from the second quarter. 
While the slowdown in private consumption demand continu es, external demand 
remains relatively strong. Aggregate demand conditions co ntinue to support 
disinflation. Moreover, medium-term inflation expectati ons continue to improve. 
Nevertheless, the gap between expectations and the target s, the risks related to 
services price inflation, and uncertainties in the global economy necessitate keeping 
the tight policy stance. 
In light of these developments, the Committee assesses that  meeting the 
medium term inflation targets requires the maintenance  of the cautious policy 
stance. The Committee closely monitors the lagged effects of the monetary 
tightening since June 2006. Moreover, the potential imp act of the progress in the 
structural reform agenda and the developments in incomes policy as well as public 
sector non-interest expenditures on inflation and inflat ion expectations are carefully 
evaluated. The Central Bank will not hesitate to tight en monetary policy in case of 
any new developments that would adversely affect the med ium-term inflation 
outlook. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the 
inflation outlook will lead the Committee to reconside r its stance. 
A brief summary of the assessments of the Committee will be released within 
eight working days. 