      No: 2007-03 
                 26 January 2007 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: 16 January 2007 
 
Inflation Developments 
1. Inflation continued its recent downward course in Decembe r and declined to 
9.65 percent at the end of the year. The main determ inant of consumer price 
developments in December is the decline in clothing and f ootwear prices that is 
beyond seasonal trends. On the other hand, the annual rate of inflation in 
unprocessed food prices increased. Meanwhile, owing to the  stable course of 
the New Turkish Lira and the slowdown in demand, the d ecline in annual 
inflation of durable goods prices continued in December.  
2. The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has not ed that uncertainties 
regarding unprocessed food prices continue. The decelerati on in the rate of 
increase in unprocessed food prices in the last few months ca me to a halt in 
December. Persistence of adverse weather conditions coupled with the recent 
slump in agricultural production, especially in grain pr oduction, may have an 
adverse effect on food prices in the upcoming period. Wit hin this framework, the 
Committee considers that food prices continue to be a risk factor for inflation. 
3. The Committee has also noted that the decline in oil p rices affected the inflation 
outlook favorably. Fuel oil prices decreased by 10.18 per cent in the August-
November period. However, energy prices related to the housing group 
increased by 3.19 percent in the last quarter due to th e rapid increases in the 
prices of natural gas and solid fuel items and this caused energy inflation to rise 
in the last two months of the year. The Committee concl udes that the recent 
favorable developments in oil prices are not yet significa nt enough to change 
the medium-term inflation outlook, given that there i s still a considerable amount 
of uncertainty regarding oil prices and lagged effects o f the past cumulative 
price increases.  
4. The annual rate of increase of the special CPI Aggregat e-H (CPI excluding 
energy, unprocessed food products, alcoholic beverages, toba cco products and 
gold) declined to 8.89 percent in December. This develop ment can be attributed 
to the decline in clothing and footwear prices that is b eyond seasonal trends, 
and by the significant decrease in prices of durable good s. Although it is 
projected that the monthly rate of changes in the H-in dex may exhibit some 
volatility in the upcoming period due to seasonal price movements, the overall 
trend is expected to be downwards in the medium term.   5. In 2006, the decline in annual inflation of services was quite limited, due to the 
persistent high inflation in the prices of rents and accom modation services. The 
possibility of the continuance of this trend in the upcom ing period emerges as a 
risk factor for disinflation.  
 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. The Committee evaluates the recent data as broadly consist ent with the outlook 
presented in the October Inflation Report.  
7. The slowdown in private consumption demand continues. Aft er declining 
sharply in the third quarter as a result of depreciatio n of the YTL, increasing 
credit interest rates, and lower consumer confidence, the demand for durable 
goods increased moderately in the fourth quarter. Alth ough seasonally adjusted 
data suggest that automobile sales are stronger than the  previous quarter, the 
annual growth rate still remains negative. The data fo r the October-November 
period indicate a modest increase in white goods sales comp ared to the third 
quarter. Business Tendency Survey (BTS) indicators also poi nt to a sluggish 
recovery in private consumption in the last quarter of 20 06.  
8. Although consumer credit, which had stopped its rapid gro wth  in the third 
quarter in line with the rise in interest rates, has sho wn some tendency to 
recover in the fourth quarter, there is still a significa nt slowdown in the rate of 
increase in consumer credit in annual terms. While housing  loans grow at a low 
rate, vehicle loans continue to decline in real terms. Th ese developments are in 
line with the slowdown in private consumption demand. T he recent rise in credit 
utilization stems mainly from items other than housing and vehicle credits. This 
suggests that the coincidence of the New Year and the rel igious feast holidays 
has caused consumers to use consumer credits and credit cards int ensively to 
meet their increased expenses. In other words, the recent hike in consumer 
credit does not point to a rebound; it can be largely explained by seasonal 
factors. 
9. External demand remains relatively strong. The net expor ts made a positive 
contribution to overall economic activity in the second hal f of the year. 
Sustained increases in labor productivity coupled with the  robust economic 
activity in the EU, and the euro’s strength against the US dollar support the 
export growth. The leading indicators pertaining to Jan uary suggest that 
external demand remains strong as of early 2007. 
10. Industrial production continued to increase during the l ast quarter of 2006 with 
the help of strong external demand. The high annual g rowth rate in industrial 
production in November can be explained by the higher n umber of working 
days compared to the same month of the previous year, du e to the lunar-
calendar-based religious holiday. However, the seasonally  adjusted figures 
point to a rise in production as well. The high capacity  utilization ratios in manufacturing industry in December and the benign expect ations of companies 
indicate that the rise in industrial production continue d in December as well, 
pointing that industrial production has kept growing in  the last quarter of 2006. 
Moreover, according to the BTS, the companies’ expectation s for production 
volume for the next three months in seasonally adjusted t erms also exhibit 
positive signals for industrial production.  
11. The tightening in financial conditions, the increase in the relative prices of 
investment goods and the expectation of deceleration in d omestic demand 
caused investment demand to slowdown in the second half of  the year. The 
leading indicators pertaining to investment demand poin t to a rise in investment 
in the last quarter in seasonally adjusted terms. Sales o f commercial vehicles 
increased in the last quarter compared to the third qua rter. Imports of capital 
goods, as well as production and imports of machinery-equ ipment, office 
equipment, and electrical machinery and appliances in th e October-November 
period exceeded those in the third quarter. The statisti cs on the construction 
permits and non-metallic minerals sector production that are closely related to 
construction investments indicate that robust activity in the  construction sector 
continues.  Moreover, the BTS indicators do not point to  a significant 
deterioration in investment expenditure tendency over th e next twelve-month 
period as of November, thereby supporting this view. 
12. To sum up, although economic activity has shown a tendency to recover in the 
last quarter of 2006, overall demand conditions continue  to support disinflation.  
Despite the relatively strong course of external demand a nd increasing public 
expenditure, total demand slowed down compared to previ ous periods. The 
annual growth rate of output is expected to be low in the last quarter of 2006, 
due to the high base in end 2005. It is projected that  the economic activity will 
continue to recover gradually in the upcoming period.  
13. Unit labor costs in the private manufacturing sector conti nued to decline since 
productivity increases were higher than the rise in real wages. This, in turn, 
continued to support the disinflation process in the thir d quarter of 2006. A 
similar trend is expected in the last quarter of the yea r.  
14. Recently available data indicate that the rate of decli ne in agricultural 
employment started to slow down significantly, while th e employment in other 
sectors continued to rise. However, the fact that the unem ployment rate in non-
agricultural sectors is still as high as 11.9 percent suggests that the rise in 
employment has not yet reached a level that would exert  pressure on inflation. 
On the other hand, the recent wage adjustments that ar e above the inflation 
target may hinder the disinflation process via its impact on expectations and 
production costs.  
15. Inflation expectations continue to improve. The distribut ion of inflation 
expectations that displayed a wide dispersion in June and July gained a more consolidated structure in recent months. Agents still expect that the disinflation 
process will continue in the medium term. Nevertheless, me dium-term inflation 
expectations are still significantly above the targets.  
 
Monetary Policy and Risks  
16. The Committee assesses that under the current circumstances m onetary policy 
stance in Turkey is non-accommodative. The decline in infla tion expectations 
has continued to tighten the monetary conditions in the  last quarter of 2006. In 
other words, although policy rates remained unchanged, the real rates have 
continued to increase. Longer-term interest rates such as t he interest rates on 
government securities and consumer loans stayed at higher l evels. 
17. We expect aggregate demand conditions to support the und erlying disinflation 
process in the next couple of quarters. However, there are  some risks regarding 
the medium-term inflation outlook. 
18. The main risk factor for the medium-term inflation out look can be stated  as 
higher-than-expected inflation inertia, as currently ma nifested in the inertia in 
medium-term inflation expectations and services inflation.  We expect that 
slowdown in the aggregate demand will induce a gradua l decline in services 
inflation in the period ahead. However, given the low  relative productivity growth 
in the sevices sector, backward-looking price setting behavior,  and the 
sensitivity of services prices to wage hikes, the developments i n prices of 
services should continue to be closely monitored. The recent  wage hikes have 
highlighted these risks even more. Given that we plan to bring inflation down 
from 10 percent to 4 percent in a fairly short period of time, the Committe 
judges that the possibility of a sustained persistence in h igh services inflation 
stands as a major risk for the medium-term outlook. Reali zation of such a risk 
could require keeping the tight policy stance for an exte nded period.  
19. Another risk for the inflation outlook is the uncertaint y regarding the impact of 
the monetary policy on aggregate demand. Lags in mone tary policy 
transmission are time variant across countries, and the Turki sh economy is no 
exception. The sizeable slowdown in the third quarter o f 2006 was a result of 
lower confidence due to financial market volatility in M ay-June period, rather 
than an outcome of the tightened monetary policy. Alt hough the tightening 
exercised since June 2006 started to be effective on private demand recently, 
the extent and the duration of the slowdown in overall  economic activity remains 
to be seen. There are also some uncertainties related to  the behavior of 
government spending, which could represent an upside risk t o aggregate 
demand, and therefore inflation in 2007. In this resp ect, the MPC has been 
closely monitoring the macroeconomic impact of the develop ments in incomes 
policy as well as public sector non-interest expenditures. 20. Another risk factor that may delay attaining the mediu m-term targets is the 
possibility of a sudden change in the global financial m arket sentiment. Global 
liquidity is still the major factor in shaping risk appet ite and volatility in financial 
markets. Currently, the concerns over high inflation and thus higher interest 
rates in the United States seem to have diminished. Howe ver, a faster than 
envisaged slowdown in the world economy or disorderly de velopments owing to 
global imbalances still remain as possible scenarios that ma y lead to another 
wave of portfolio shock in emerging markets. The Committe e will revise the 
policy rates if these shocks turns out to have lasting effects on the medium-term 
inflation outlook. 
21. There are favorable scenarios regarding the inflation o utlook as well as 
unfavorable ones. Turkey is a net commodity importer. Al though a slowdown in 
the global economic growth or a further easing in commo dity prices could have 
an immediate adverse impact on domestic inflation throug h its impact on the 
global risk appetite, it will also lead to a positive te rms of trade shock and thus 
to a more favorable outlook in the medium term. 
22. In light of these developments, the Committee decided t o keep the policy rates 
on hold. The Committee has assessed that meeting the med ium term inflation 
targets necessitates the maintenance of the cautious policy stance. The gap 
between medium-term inflation expectations and the tar gets, the risks related to 
services price inflation, and the uncertainties in global economy necessitate 
keeping the tight policy stance.  
23. The Committee closely monitors the lagged effects of the  monetary tightening 
since June 2006. Moreover, the potential impact of the p rogress in the structural 
reform agenda and developments in incomes policy as well as public sector 
non-interest expenditures on inflation and inflation e xpectations are carefully 
evaluated. The Central Bank will not hesitate to tight en monetary policy in case 
of any new developments that would adversely affect the medium-term inflation 
outlook. 
24. The continuation of the European Union accession process an d the sustained 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged in th e economic program 
are still crucial. Developments related to the structural reforms that would 
enhance the quality of fiscal discipline in the medium a nd long run are followed 
closely from the perspective of both macroeconomic stability  and price stability. 
Continued determination in implementing the decisive st eps taken in these 
areas in recent years will increase the resilience of the economy against 
possible changes in the global conjuncture. 
 