No: 2007 - 20 
 14 August 2007 
  
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: August 14, 2007 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim 
Turhan, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) decided  to keep short-term 
interest rates (policy rates) unchanged as follows: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 17.50  percent, and lending rate 
at 22.50  percent, 
b)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate  applied between 4:00 
p.m. – 5:00 p.m. at 13.50  percent, lending rate at 25.50  percent, 
c)  The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions at 21.50  percent. 
 
Recent developments in economic activity and inflation are  in line with the outlook 
presented in the July Inflation Report. While private consumption and investment 
demand exhibit signs of recovery, external demand moderat es. Aggregate demand 
conditions continue to support the disinflation process. Th e Committee notes the 
favorable developments in the services inflation since the b eginning of 2007. 
Notwithstanding the risks related to energy and food pr ices, inflation continues to 
decelerate owing to the lagged effects of strong moneta ry tightening. The Committee 
closely monitors the developments in the international l iquidity conditions and the 
credit markets, and assesses that these developments have not ch anged the 
inflation outlook at this point. 
In this respect the Committee maintains the policy stance outlined in the Inflation 
Report, and thus envisions a measured easing starting from  the last quarter of 2007. 
However, the exact timing and extent of the easing may va ry depending on the 
incoming information regarding global liquidity condi tions, external demand, public 
expenditures and other determinants of medium term inf lation outlook.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the inflation 
outlook will lead the Committee to reconsider its stance.  
Summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting wil l be released within eight 
working days. 
 