No: 2007-24 
                                                                                    13 September 2007 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: September 13, 2007 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, 
Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) decided  to lower the 
policy rates as follows: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate from 17.50 to 17.25 percent , and 
lending rate from 22.50 to 22.25 percent , 
b)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate  applied between 4:00 p.m. – 
5:00 p.m. from 13.50 to 13,25 percent , lending rate from 25.50 to 22,25 percent , 
c)  The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity  borrowing facilities provided 
for primary dealers via repo transactions from 21.50 to 21,25 percent . 
 
Readings on economic activity and inflation are in line  with the outlook presented 
in the July Inflation Report. While private consumptio n and investment demand exhibits 
signs of recovery, external demand moderates. Aggregate  demand conditions continue to 
support the disinflation process. The Committee assesses that  developments in services 
inflation have been more favorable than expected. No twithstanding the risks related to 
energy and food prices, inflation is expected to furthe r decelerate owing to the lagged 
effects of strong monetary tightening. 
The Committee closely monitors the developments in inte rnational liquidity 
conditions and credit markets. In the meeting, the Commi ttee evaluated the recent data, 
and assessed that global developments are likely to restra in both the domestic and 
external demand growth, increasing the downward risks on  achieving the 4 percent target 
in the medium term. 
In this respect, the Committee decided that current condi tions require launching 
the measured rate cuts mentioned in the Inflation Repo rt. The Committee underlines that 
the current monetary policy stance continues to be restrict ive. The exact timing and 
extent of further easing may vary depending on the i ncoming information regarding global 
liquidity conditions, external demand, public expendit ures and other determinants of 
medium term inflation outlook. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the inflation 
outlook will lead the Committee to reconsider its stance.  
Summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting wil l be released within eight 
working days. 