No: 2007- 18 
23 July 2007  
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 12 July 2007 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices fell by 0.24% in June, bringing 12-m onth cumulative inflation 
down by 0.63 percentage points to 8.60%. Accordingly, a nnual inflation registered 
a total decline of 2.26 percentage points in the past 3  months and stayed within 
the uncertainty band. 
2. Unprocessed food prices remain volatile. Last month’s S ummary of the 
Monetary Policy Committee Meeting mentioned the possib ility of more limited 
price declines of unprocessed food this summer due to early  harvest of some 
vegetable items. Indeed, the decline in vegetable pri ces in June was less than 
last year’s levels and thus the annual inflation of unp rocessed food prices 
increased, notwithstanding the partial correction in fru it prices. Volatility in fruit 
and vegetable prices continue to pose risks to the course of  headline inflation. 
Moreover, bad crop of wheat may have adverse effects on  consumer prices 
through bread and grain products. 
3. The rise in oil prices had adverse effects on inflatio n via fuel prices in the past 
couple of months. Utility prices and non-oil energy ite ms however, continued to 
display a benign course. 
4. Durable goods (excl. gold) inflation fell to 0.32% , per annum, in response to 
both the strong Turkish lira and the easing demand. On the other hand, the 
annual inflation in clothing and footwear prices rose t o 7.15%. 
5. Although the services inflation ceased to decline in Ju ne, developments in 
sub-items suggest a continued downward trend: The main d river of services 
inflation in June was the rise in mobile phone call rat es. The delayed effects of 
rising oil prices on transportation services also somewhat r estrained the decline in 
services inflation. On the other hand, monthly inflati on in other services items 
remained below last year’s levels. In fact, the cumulati ve rise in service prices 
was only 4.61% in the first half of the year, the low est 6-month figure since the 
2003-based CPI index was introduced. Annual services infl ation is expected to 
further decline in the forthcoming period. 
6. Special CPI aggregates also respond to last year’s mon etary tightening. The 
favorable course of services and durable goods prices in th e last three months 
significantly curbed the inflation in special CPI aggreg ates. Inflation is expected to come further down in the next couple of months, on the  back of the lagged effects 
of monetary tightening and the high base of the second  half of 2006. 
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation  
7. The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) assesse s that the recent 
data on economic activity is broadly consistent with the o utlook presented in the 
April Inflation Report. 
8. Although the GDP grew by 6.8% in annual terms dur ing the first quarter of 
2007, seasonally adjusted growth was only 0.4%, indicati ng an ongoing slowdown 
in economic activity. 
9. Contribution of domestic demand to GDP growth was l imited during the first 
quarter of 2007. Seasonally adjusted data suggest that private consumption and 
private investment expenditures displayed a moderate i ncrease over the previous 
quarter, while construction investment continued to grow  steadily. 
10. Consumption spending continued to moderate in the second quarter. The 
pace of growth in total consumer loans was low during th e second quarter 
compared to the first half of 2006, although personal expenditure loans gained 
momentum in this period. While automobile loans contin ued to decrease in the 
second quarter, other leading indicators on domestic dema nd such as domestic 
sales of white goods and imports of consumer goods declined  slightly on 
seasonally adjusted terms during April-May period. Takin g into account the 
significant base effect driven by the strong demand of t he last year, the annual 
growth in private consumption demand is expected to tur n to negative in the 
second quarter. 
11. Indicators of investment demand point to a modest r ecovery. While imports of 
capital goods displayed a recovery during April-May, th e decline in commercial 
vehicle sales continued to restrain machinery and equipme nt investment. 
Construction investment, on the other hand, keep growin g, albeit at a moderate 
pace compared to the previous two years. 
12. In the first quarter, annual real growth rate in  total government spending was 
9.1%, moderating the slowdown in aggregate demand. P rimary spending 
increased by 29.3% in nominal terms, per annum, during  the April-May period, 
indicating that government spending continued to rise a t a high pace in the 
second quarter. This observation is also supported by the January-June figures of 
the Treasury's primary cash balance. 
13. External demand continues to support the economic act ivity. Industrial 
production was strong in May with the stimulus of export s. Leading indicators suggest that export growth remained robust also in June and July. Strong external 
demand and ongoing productivity gains should support th e export growth in the 
forthcoming period. However, considering the strong secon d-half figures of last 
year, the annual rate of growth in exports is expected  to moderate in the 
upcoming period. 
14. The marked decline in inflation had a favorable i mpact on inflation 
expectations. Improvement in the expectations should cont inue in the upcoming 
period as the inflation keeps declining. However, the C ommittee reads the 
existing gap between medium-term inflation expectatio ns and targets as a factor 
requiring caution. 
15. In sum, while the developments in energy and food  prices, public 
expenditures, and external demand since the last quarte r of 2006 restrain the 
disinflation process, domestic demand and inflation contin ue to decelerate thanks 
to the lagged effects of strong monetary tightening. 
  Monetary Policy and Risks  
16. Recent developments are broadly in line with the April Inflation Report. 
Therefore, adhering to the outlook presented in the R eport, the Committee 
envisions a measured easing starting from the last quarte r of 2007. However, the 
exact timing and extent of the easing may vary depend ing on the incoming 
information regarding external demand, public expend itures and other 
determinants of medium term inflation outlook. 
17. It should be stressed that this policy stance is based on  the current information 
set and thus it should by no means be interpreted as a co mmitment on behalf of 
the Committee. The Committee highlighted the follow ing uncertainties that could 
necessitate a significant revision in the monetary policy outlook in either direction: 
18. Inflation expectations remain sticky, partly owing t o the elevated headline 
inflation figures of the past year. Uncertainties regar ding the food and oil prices 
and the incomes policy in 2007 further add to the stickin ess in inflation 
expectations. The present gap between medium term expe ctations and targets 
suggests that the target inflation may have been servin g less of an anchor 
recently. This constitutes a risk for wage setting behavior , and hence, for services 
inflation. Realization of such a risk would slowdown the  pace of disinflation, 
possibly requiring a tighter-than-envisaged monetary p olicy.  
19. There are certain services items, of which, inflation  inertia is driven by 
structural factors and thus, cannot simply be explained by  backward indexation. 
Needless to say, these prices can hardly be influenced by m onetary policy. For 
example, annual rent inflation have remained sticky ar ound 20 percent in the past 
three years, contributing to annual headline inflatio n by about one percentage points each year. Rent inflation is expected to moderat e in the next couple of 
months, and further stabilize in the medium to long t erm, as the housing supply 
keeps rising. Nevertheless, the possibility that rent infl ation will continue to 
exceed the other services inflation is considered as a risk f actor against the 
disinflation process. 
20. The monetary transmission mechanism has proven to be effective during the 
past year. Despite the increase in non-interest governme nt spending and the 
robust external demand that have restrained the speed of disinflation, monetary 
tightening has been successful to bring inflation back to t he projected path 
heading towards the medium term targets. However, in order to reach the 
medium term target of 4 percent, the domestic demand n eeds to stay under 
control for a while. However, domestic demand condition s may turn less 
supportive for the disinflation process, once the prevail ing uncertainties fade out 
and the long-term interest rates continue to decline du ring the second half of the 
year. Such a situation could lead monetary policy to sta y more cautious than 
implied by the baseline scenario. Nonetheless, such an out come would be less 
likely, should the cautious monetary policy stance backed by  fiscal discipline. 
21. Possible fluctuations in the global liquidity condit ions continue to pose risks to 
the inflation outlook. The inflation and growth outl ook for the developed 
economies are still not clear, and thus, international f inancial markets continue to 
be sensitive to new data releases. Ongoing uncertainties over the global 
imbalances stand out as another risk factor that might lea d to abrupt changes in 
portfolio preferences and liquidity conditions. The Cen tral Bank of Turkey will limit 
the potential inflationary effects of a possible shift i n risk perceptions by pursuing 
an active liquidity management strategy. 
22. In this respect, the Committee, considering the curre nt levels of liquidity, 
assessed that the Central Bank Liquidity Bills could be use d, in addition to the 
current tools used in open market operations, to enhance the effectiveness of 
liquidity management when necessary. 
23. Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not sufficien t for achieving price 
stability. The role of fiscal policy and structural refor ms are also critical in this 
process. In this respect, the European Union accession process a nd the 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged in t he economic program 
remain to be important for long-term stability. Part icularly, advances in structural 
reforms that would enhance the quality of fiscal discipli ne are monitored closely 
with regard to their effects on both macroeconomic and p rice stability.  