No: 2007- 14 
26 June 2007  
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 14 June 2007 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices rose by 0.50% in May. Annual inflati on fell to 9.23% by 1.5 
percentage points, mainly owing to the lagged effects o f monetary tightening, the 
partial correction in unprocessed food prices and the base effect. 
2. Annual inflation of unprocessed food prices declined t o 11.09%. This 
downfall was, as noted by the Monetary Policy Committe e (MPC) last month, due 
to warmer weather conditions resulting in the early ma rketing of certain summer 
crops. This development mainly drove down the vegetable p rices, whereas fruit 
prices continued to rise dramatically. The considerable de cline in vegetable prices 
in May had a favorable impact on May inflation but br ought along the possibility 
that price declines may remain more limited during the  summer months. Rising 
support prices for grains, possible drops in crop yields of certain products caused 
by unusually warm weather conditions and low rainfall,  and the new Wholesale 
Market Regulation on fresh fruit-vegetable trade are a mong other factors posing 
uncertainties over food prices. On the other hand, recent  Value Added Tax cuts in 
a number of food items may have a slightly favorable ef fect on food prices in 
June. 
3. The recent downfall in services inflation became quite  discernible in May. 
Annual services inflation fell by 0.91 percentage points to 10.85% down from 
April. Cumulative rise in services prices for the first five months is 3.39%–the 
lowest figure since the 2003 based CPI index was introduce d. Especially inflation 
in transportation services and restaurants-hotels indicate a  notable improvement 
compared to the previous years. Prices of most items under services tend to 
decelerate owing to the monetary tightening, yet ren ts maintain an elevated 
course. 
4. Energy prices are much affected by soaring global oil  prices. Fuel prices 
rose by 8.45% within the last three months. Utility pr ices, on the other hand, 
display a benign outlook with quite moderate rises. The  Committee, however, 
carefully evaluates the possible impact of oil prices on ut ilities. 
5. The Committee predicts that inflation will further  slow down in the coming 
months. The fading out of the exchange rate pass-throug h effect driven by last 
year’s volatility, and the lagged effects of monetary t ightening especially on prices of services and durable goods are expected to add to the d ecline in annual 
inflation. Special CPI aggregates also suggest a similar outlook. 
  Factors Affecting Inflation  
6. The Committee assesses that recent data on economic activi ty is broadly 
consistent with the outlook presented in the April Infla tion Report. 
7. The slowdown in private demand becomes more pronounce d. Available 
data suggest that domestic demand continued to moderate in the second quarter. 
Housing and personal expenditure loans expanded at a mod est pace in annual 
terms, whereas the demand for automobile loans continue d to decline. 
Seasonally adjusted white good sales and imports of consum er goods fell in April 
and the automobile sales plunged in April and May indicating an ongoing 
retrenchment in consumer demand. 
8. Private investment demand for machinery and equipmen t continues to slow 
down. While the seasonally adjusted data for the electr ical machinery and 
electronics production and capital goods imports in April are higher than the 
March figures, the reduced machinery-equipment productio n and the continued 
decline in commercial vehicle sales indicate that investment growth remains at a 
subdued level. Production and import data on non-metal lic minerals, on the other 
hand, signal a modest growth in construction. 
9. External demand remains strong. Exports continued to g row more than 
imports in real terms in April. The leading indicators reveal a similar pattern for 
May and June. These developments suggest that net external  demand has 
continued to support growth during the first half of 2 007. 
10. Weakening course in domestic demand led to a slowdown  in industrial 
production, despite robust external demand. April indust rial production figure was 
lower than that of March in seasonally adjusted terms. A lso considering the strong 
second-quarter figures of the last year, annual growth in industrial production is 
expected to decelerate significantly in the second quarter  of 2007.  
11. Moreover, the moderating growth in services employme nt in the last three 
quarters is in line with the slowdown in economic activity . 
12. The marked decline in annual inflation in May had  a favorable impact on 
inflation expectations. Accordingly, short and medium ter m expectations 
displayed a slight improvement. However, ongoing percept ions of uncertainty limit 
the downward trend in inflation expectations. The impr ovement in medium-term 
expectations should continue as the headline inflation kee ps decelerating towards 
the 4 per cent target in the upcoming period. 13. In sum, economic developments over the last 12 months a re highly 
consistent with the Committee’s predictions. Demand for co nsumption and 
investment continue to ease, while strong external demand  moderates the 
slowdown in overall economic activity. Aggregate demand co nditions increasingly 
support disinflation. Against this background, inflation is expected to maintain its 
downward course.  
  Monetary Policy and Risks  
14. Parallel to the favorable outlook in medium-term inflation expectations, 
interest rates on government securities continue to decline . The fall in interest 
rates and the ongoing capital inflows expand the supply of loanable funds and 
add to the downward pressure on bank lending rates, as r ecently observed in 
housing loan rates. However, considering the cautious stance  of monetary policy, 
the downward trend in lending rates is expected to be l imited in the short term. 
Current levels of the bank lending rates are still high enough to curb expenditures. 
Moreover, the rise in risk perceptions and the resulting p recautionary savings 
further limit the demand for credit. 
15. Monetary indicators also confirm the tight stance of monetary policy and the 
slowdown in economic activity. Real volume of currency in ci rculation that 
displayed a slowdown since mid-2006 declined in annual t erms in 2007. 
Nevertheless, changes in portfolio preferences and innovati ons in the financial 
system should also be taken into account while evaluating t he monetary 
indicators. 
16. The lagged effects of monetary tightening exercised since June 2006 are 
quite noticeable. Against this background, inflation is e xpected to maintain its 
downward trend. However, there are some remaining risks to the inflation outlook. 
17. Inertia in inflation expectations and the backward l ooking pricing behavior 
poses a significant risk for the inflation outlook. The el evated course of medium-
term inflation expectations continue to stand as a risk fact or, particularly through 
its potential impact on the wage and price setting beha vior. The Committee 
perceives the recent decline in services inflation as a favora ble development, but 
also notes the risk that services inflation may remain high  for a prolonged period. 
In order to eliminate the gap between medium-term e xpectations and targets, the 
prudent monetary policy needs to be reinforced by sustai ned fiscal discipline.  
18. Although the monetary tightening exercised since June  2006 is affecting 
domestic demand as expected, uncertainties over the lagged effects of monetary 
policy on inflation still remain. Moreover, rising non- interest government 
expenditures has the potential to limit the effectiveness of monetary tightening. 
Non-interest budget expenditures of the central governme nt during the first five 
months of 2007 surpassed the already generous budgetary projections a development that requires close monitoring. In this respe ct, the Committee 
carefully evaluates the potential impacts of the developm ents in incomes policy 
and public sector non-interest expenditures on inflation and inflation expectations. 
19. Recent developments suggest that international liqui dity conditions and 
global risk appetite remain to be risks against the infla tion outlook. Currently, the 
uncertainty related to main economic indicators in develo ped economies is 
perceived as a risk factor. As a matter of fact, recently, st ronger-than-expected 
data on the US economic activity has deferred rate cut exp ectations, which in turn 
led to fluctuations in the global financial markets. Mor eover, ongoing uncertainties 
over the global imbalances stand out as another risk factor  that might lead to 
abrupt changes in global risk appetite and liquidity con ditions. 
20. The elevated crude oil prices continue to exert infla tionary pressures and 
slow down the pace of disinflation. The Committee judg es that the risks against 
energy prices continue to be of concern, and closely monit ors the movements in 
crude oil prices with regard to the inflation outlook. 
21. To sum up, the Committee decided to keep the policy  rates unchanged 
against the risks such as the gap between inflation expectat ions and targets, the 
backward looking pricing behavior, the remaining uncertai nties notwithstanding 
recent favorable developments over services price inflation, rising oil prices, and 
prevailing uncertainties. The Committee assesses that meeti ng the medium term 
inflation targets requires the maintenance of the tigh t policy stance. 
22. Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not sufficien t for achieving price 
stability. The role of fiscal policy and structural refor ms are also critical in this 
process. Developments in structural reforms that would enha nce the quality of 
fiscal discipline are closely monitored in terms of both m acroeconomic and price 
stability. The European Union accession process and the imp lementation of the 
structural reforms envisaged in the economic program also r emain to be of 
concern. Continued determination in implementing the decisive steps taken in 
these areas in recent years will strengthen the resilience  of the economy against 
sudden changes in global sentiment. 