No: 2007-07           27 March 2007  
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 15 March 2007 
 
 
 
Inflation Developments 
 
1. In February, consumer prices increased by 0.43% and the a nnual inflation rate 
rose up to 10.16% The rise in annual inflation can be mainly attributed to (i) tax-
driven hikes in cigarette prices, (ii) early winter discou nts in clothing, (iii) rise in 
processed food prices and (iv) the base effect of durable goods discounts of the 
same period last year. These developments led to an incr ease in the annual 
inflation of Special CPI aggregates, also suspending the  downward trend of the 
annual rate of increase of the H index (CPI excluding energy, unprocessed 
food, alcoholic beverages, tobacco products and gold). But , the annual inflation 
measured by the H Index is expected to resume its downwa rd movement 
starting from the second quarter of the year.  
2. After rising sharply in January, the annual inflation rate of unprocessed food 
prices exhibited a partial correction in February. Yet,  the inflation in 
unprocessed food prices still remains very high. Energy pr ices, on the other 
hand, retraced their earlier run-up by March, after a  slowdown in January and 
February, along with the recent upward movement in o il prices.  
3. As regards the services group, the annual inflation of r ents, hotels-restaurants 
and transportation services declined at a subdued level w hile the overall 
services inflation remained relatively unchanged as annu al inflation in other 
sub-items of the services group continued to rise.  
4. Besides, the Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee)  noted the possible 
effects of administered price hikes on March inflation, wh ich was highlighted at 
the previous meeting. The Committee foresees that the annual inflation might 
thus temporarily rise in March but will start to decline  gradually by the second 
quarter. 
 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
 
5. The Committee evaluates the recent data as broadly consi stent with the outlook 
presented in the January Inflation Report: 
6. The slowdown in private consumer demand continues. Season ally adjusted 
automobile sales fell in January and February, while sa les of white goods did not change since the last quarter of 2006. In addition,  the consumer confidence 
indices do not suggest a noticeable change in semi- and no n-durable goods 
demand for the first quarter of 2007. The leading in dicators on private 
consumption demand also point that the seasonally adjuste d private 
consumption will not reveal a significant change in the first quarter of 2007 
compared to the last quarter of 2006.  
7. Credit growth continued to slow down and so did the gr owth rate of other 
monetary indicators. Although bank lending rates decline d gradually since late 
January, the current financing conditions, together with  the tight liquidity 
conditions and the surging global volatility, continue to restrain credit expansion.  
8. Investment demand and imports of capital goods did not change significantly 
compared to the last quarter of 2006, whereas the sales of commercial vehicles 
fell in January and February. On the other hand, the  data on non-metallic 
minerals production and imports point to an ongoing ro bust activity in 
construction. 
9. Foreign demand remains relatively strong. Exports keep growing as the 
productivity in the manufacturing industry continues to rise and the European 
economy preserves its robust economic activity, while impor ts are restrained by 
the slowdown in growth rate. Accordingly, January’s trad e volume indexes 
indicate that the growth rate in exports prevailed ov er imports. The ongoing high 
rate of export growth in February and March, as revea led by the Turkish 
Exporters’ Assembly figures, suggests that the foreign dem and continues to 
have a positive contribution on the growth rate. 
10. Despite the ongoing decline in domestic demand, industri al production keeps its 
strength on the back of foreign demand, with an upswing  in January mainly 
driven by base effects and the number of business days. Ye t, controlling for 
these factors does not change the fact that industrial pro duction still displays a 
significant rise. Moreover, capacity utilization rates an d expectations of 
February suggest that the production will continue to r ise.  
11. To sum up, the Committee judges that aggregate demand  conditions continue 
to support disinflation. Although economic activity is pr ojected to recover 
gradually in the second half of the year, annual grow th rate in GDP will be low 
in the second quarter owing mainly to base effects. 
12. Recent data indicate that services employment growth cont inued to moderate 
since mid-2006, which supports the slowdown in economic acti vity. On the 
other hand, the co-existence of a remarkable slowdown in  industrial 
employment with strong industrial production in 2007 su ggests that labor 
productivity continues to rise.  
13.  Developments in other cost factors do not display a nega tive outlook in 
general. As the growth rate of the world economy becom es more balanced, the crude oil prices display a more stable course. However, it  is not possible to 
make accurate projections regarding the oil prices in the medium to long-term. 
Moreover, the recent fluctuations in metal prices confirm  that risks related to the 
commodity prices, as a whole, should not be disregarded.  
14. Although the end-year inflation expectations displayed  a slight upward 
movement in March, medium-term inflation expectations remained unchanged, 
yet significantly above the target. As inflation starts declining in the upcoming 
period, the expectations will gradually converge to th e target.  
 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
 
15. While taking monetary policy decisions, the Committee fo cuses on whether the 
medium-term inflation outlook is consistent with the tar get. In other words, what 
matters for the conduct of monetary policy is the evolut ion of inflation in the 
medium run, rather than short-term temporary fluctuat ions. In this respect, a 
one-off rise in March inflation, led by administered p rices, will not be crucial in 
the decision-making process, as it does not alter the mediu m-term inflation 
outlook.  
16. CBT has not changed its policy rates since August 2006. The  reduction in the 
risk premium and the improvement in inflation expectat ions have further 
tightened the policy stance since then. The cautious stance of monetary policy 
contained inflation expectations and thus the long-term  interest rates. The 
fluctuations in international financial markets in early  March induced the interest 
rates of government securities to rise. Yet, the interest  rates came down soon, 
as the volatility was short-lived. The downward moveme nt of bank lending rates 
since January moderated thereafter.  
17. In sum, a joint evaluation of the current policy stance and other factors affecting 
inflation suggests that inflation will maintain a down ward course in the 
upcoming period, converging to the targets in the medi um run. Yet, several 
risks remain. 
18. The main risk to the mid-term inflation outlook is the possibility of higher-than-
expected downward persistence in inflation, manifested l ately by the inertia in 
inflation expectations and services inflation. The curren t level of inflation 
expectations poses a risk to wage and price setting behavio r and, thus, to the 
disinflation process. Moreover, services prices-related risks st ill prevail. Given 
the relatively low productivity in the services sector, t he backward-looking price 
setting behavior and the sensitivity of services prices to wage hikes, relatively 
high services inflation should not fall as a surprise. How ever, even if these 
factors are taken into account, the services inflation still  needs to fall below its 
current level in order to reach the medium term targe ts. The Committee, in this 
regard, continues to closely monitor services price develop ments.  19. The uncertainty concerning the lagged effects of monetar y policy on aggregate 
demand still remains a risk to the inflation outlook. Al though the impact of 
monetary tightening exercised since June 2006 on private  demand has become 
noticeable recently, the cumulative impact is still to be  seen. And the recent 
increase in government spending adds to this uncertainty.  In this respect, the 
Committee closely monitors the indicators related to the  overall economic 
activity.  
20. The Committe has frequently emphasized the fact that w aning risk appetite or a 
possible fluctuation in liquidity conditions in global m arkets continue to pose a 
risk against the inflation outlook. Indeed, the economic data announced in the 
United States, Japan and China delivered another bout  of volatility in 
international markets in early March. Although these fl uctuations were short 
lived and temporary, and did not deteriorate the in flation outlook, they indicate 
that uncertainties related to global liquidity conditi ons may continue in the 
period ahead. The Committee will not allow these possi ble fluctuations to have 
adverse effects on the medium-term inflation outlook. 
21.  In light of these developments, the Committee has assesse d that meeting the 
medium-term inflation targets requires the maintenance  of a cautious policy 
stance and decided to keep the policy rates on hold. The uncertainties in global 
economy, the gap between inflation expectations and ta rgets and the risks to 
services prices inflation necessitate keeping a tight policy stance. 
22. The Committee closely monitors the lagged effects of the  monetary tightening 
since June 2006. Moreover, the potential impact of the progress in the structural 
reform agenda and developments in incomes policy as well  as public sector 
non-interest expenditures on inflation and inflation expectations are carefully 
evaluated. Should any adverse developments affecting t he medium-term 
inflation outlook presented in the January Inflation R eport arise, the Central 
Bank will not hesitate to further tighten the monetar y policy stance.  
23. The continuation of the European Union accession process an d the sustained 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged in t he economic program 
remain of critical concern. Developments in structural ref orms that would 
enhance the quality of fiscal discipline in the medium a nd long run are closely 
monitored both in terms of macroeconomic stability and p rice stability. 
Continued determination in implementing the decisive steps taken in these 
areas in recent years will strengthen the resilience of t he economy against 
possible changes in the global conjuncture.  