No: 2007-06                 15 March 2007 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE 
Meeting Date: March 15, 2007 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Baçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. brahim Turhan, 
Mehmet Yörükolu. 
 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has decided to keep  
short-term interest rates (policy rates) unchanged as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 17.50 percent, and lending rate at 22.50 
percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate applied between  
4:00 p.m. – 4:30 p.m. at 13.50 percent, lending rate at 25.50 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity borrowing facilities provided for 
primary dealers via repo transactions at 21.50 percent. 
 
The Committee evaluates the recent data as broadly consistent with the outlook 
presented in the January Inflation Report. While the slowdown in private consumption 
demand continues, foreign demand remains relatively strong. Aggregate demand 
conditions continue to support disinflation. Against this background, the disinflation trend 
is expected to become discernible starting from the second quarter of 2007. 
Nevertheless, prevailing uncertainties in the global economy, the gap between inflation 
expectations and the targets, and the risks related to services price inflation necessitate 
keeping the tight policy stance. The Committee also noted the possible effects of 
administered price hikes on March inflation, which was highlighted in the previous 
meeting. 
In light of these developments, the Committee assesses that meeting the medium 
term inflation targets requires the maintenance of the cautious policy stance. The 
Committee closely monitors the lagged effects of the monetary tightening since June 
2006. Moreover, the potential impacts of the progress in the structural reform agenda 
and the developments in incomes policy as well as public sector non-interest 
expenditures on inflation and inflation expectations are carefully evaluated. Should any 
adverse developments affecting the medium-term inflation outlook presented in the 
January Inflation Report arise, the Central Bank will not hesitate to further tighten the 
monetary policy stance. 
A brief summary of the assessments of the Committee will be released within 
eight working days. 
 