No: 2007-28                               16 Octobe r 2007 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: October 16, 2007 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, Mehmet 
Yörüko ğlu. 
 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) decided  to lower the policy rates 
as follows: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate from 17.25 to 16.75 percent , and lending rate 
from 22.25 to 21.50 percent , 
b)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate  applied between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 
p.m. from 13.25 to 12.75 percent , lending rate from 25.25 to 24.50 percent , 
c)  The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity  borrowing facilities provided for 
primary dealers via repo transactions from 21.25 to 20.50 percent . 
Readings on economic activity and inflation are in line  with the outlook presented in the 
July Inflation Report. While private consumption and i nvestment demand exhibits signs of 
recovery, external demand moderates. Aggregate demand  conditions continue to support the 
disinflation process. Services inflation continues its favor able course. Notwithstanding the risks 
related to energy, food, and administered prices, infl ation is expected to decelerate owing to the 
lagged effects of strong monetary tightening. 
The Committee closely monitors the developments in inte rnational liquidity conditions and 
credit markets. September rate cut decision led to a signi ficant fall in both the medium and long-
term interest rates, reducing the downward risks on mediu m term inflation posed by global 
economic developments. 
In light of these developments, the Committee decided to continue the measured rate 
cuts. The Committee underlines that the current level o f the short-term interest rates remains 
restrictive even after the recent policy rate cuts. The C ommittee assesses that, under the current 
policy stance envisaging a measured and cautious rate cut cy cle, the risks on attaining the 
inflation target in the medium term are balanced. Th e timing and extent  of further easing will 
depend on the incoming information regarding global liquidity conditions, external demand, 
public expenditures and other determinants of the medi um term inflation outlook. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the inflation outlook 
will lead the Committee to reconsider its stance. 
Considering the downward trend in interest rates, the Committee decided to narrow the 
gap between borrowing and lending rates in order to limit the extent of potential fluctuations in 
overnight interest rates. In this regard, borrowing ra tes are reduced by 50 basis points , while 
lending rates are cut by 75 basis points . It should be noted, however, that the additional cu t in 
lending rates is merely a technical adjustment.     
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within eight 
working days.  