No: 2007-01
16 January 2007

DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
Meeting Date: January 16, 2007
Committee Members
Durmuş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Başçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, Mehmet
Yörükoğlu.

The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has decided to keep short-term
interest rates (policy rates) unchanged as follows:
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 17.50 percent, and lending rate at 22.50
percent,
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate applied between 4:00 p.m. –
4:30 p.m. at 13.50 percent, lending rate at 25.50 percent,
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity borrowing facilities provided for
primary dealers via repo transactions at 21.50 percent.
The Committee evaluates the recent data as broadly consistent with the outlook
presented in the October Inflation Report. While the slowdown in the private consumption
demand continues, the external demand remains relatively strong. Although economic activity
has shown a tendency to recover in the last quarter of 2006, overall demand conditions
continue to support disinflation. Inflation expectations continue to improve. Nevertheless, the
gap between the medium-term inflation expectations and the targets, the risks related to the
services price inflation, and the uncertainties in the global economy necessitate keeping the
tight policy stance. Moreover, the Committee notes the support from oil prices to the inflation
outlook, as well as the uncertainties regarding the unprocessed food prices.
In light of these developments, the Committee assesses that meeting the medium term
inflation targets would necessitate the maintenance of the cautious policy stance. The
Committee closely monitors the lagged effects of the monetary tightening since June 2006.
Moreover, the potential impact of the progress in the structural reform agenda and the
developments in the incomes policy as well as the public sector non-interest expenditures on
the inflation and the inflation expectations are carefully evaluated. The Central Bank will not
hesitate to tighten monetary policy in case of any new developments that would adversely
affect the medium-term inflation outlook.
It should be emphasized that any new data or information related to the inflation
outlook will lead the Committee to reconsider its stance.
A brief summary of the assessments of the Committee will be released within eight
working days.

