No: 2007- 12 
24 May 2007  
 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 14 May 2007 
 
 
    Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices increased by 1.21% in April, bringing  annual inflation down 
to 10.72%. Yet, the surge in clothing prices restrained the decline in inflation 
despite the considerable slowdown in inflation of consume r durables and 
services. 
2. The rise in the annual inflation of clothing and f ootwear can be attributed to the 
recent cost-driven hikes in apparel manufacturing prices. R ecent course in 
clothing and footwear prices suggest that the price devel opments in this group will 
contribute less to the disinflation process in 2007 compare d to 2005 and 2006. On 
the other hand, the prices of durable goods exhibited a favorable outlook in April, 
possibly owing to the strength of Turkish lira as well as the slowdown in domestic 
demand. 
3. Recent price developments suggest that services inflatio n has been easing, 
albeit modestly. Annual services inflation dropped to i ts lowest level since 
September 2006. Monthly hikes in services prices from Janua ry to April fell 
behind the year-ago levels of the same period. Along with the slowdown in 
domestic demand, services inflation is expected to decline further gradually in the 
upcoming period, yet, the Monetary Policy Committee ( the Committee) considers 
that this improvement may be limited given the backwar d-looking pricing 
behavior, the high-sensitivity of service prices to wage hikes and the relatively low 
productivity in this sector.  
4. Monthly inflation in the housing utilities continue d to ease in April. On the other 
hand, prices of petroleum products re-accelerated by a 6. 13% rise in the last two 
months, slowing down the decline in headline inflation . 
5. Although clothing prices displayed a sharp rise in Apr il, the favorable 
developments in prices of durable goods and services pulle d the annual inflation 
of all special CPI aggregates down. With the disappeara nce of the exchange rate 
pass-through effect of May and June 2006, the downward trend in the annual rate 
of increase of H index will be further noticed in the upcoming period. 6. Unprocessed food prices continued to rise dramatically, at a rate of 16.63% 
per annum. Fruit prices soared by 42.52% in the first f our months of 2007, up 
from an average 3% monthly rise for the same period i n 2005 and 2006. Due to 
warm weather conditions beyond seasonal norms, the declin es in fresh vegetable 
and fruit prices, which normally take place in the summer  season, may shift from 
June to May. Moreover, exchange rate movements and the  subsequent pass-
through in May 2006 constitute a high base on the consum er price index. In this 
regard, the Committee noted that a partial correction  in unprocessed food prices, 
and the base effect may contribute to the decline in an nual inflation in May.  
7. In light of these developments, the Committee assessed  that the awaited signs 
of disinflation have emerged in April and that the d isinflation trend will be more 
significant in the upcoming period. 
    Factors Affecting Inflation  
8. The Committee identifies the recent data on economi c activity as broadly 
consistent with the outlook presented in the April Infla tion Report. 
9. The slowdown in private consumption demand continues . Consumer credits 
exhibit a pattern as outlined in the inflation repor t. Automobile loans continue to 
decrease in real terms. Housing loans are on a rise, albe it at a modest pace. 
Personal expenditure loans, on the other hand, continu e to increase at a relatively 
higher rate but do not reveal a notable acceleration.  Despite a limited fall 
observed recently, bank loan rates are still above the p revious year’s levels and 
continue to curb credit expansion. 
10. Leading indicators suggest that the slowdown in dome stic demand continues. 
Sales of automobiles and white goods fell in the first quarter of 2007 in seasonally 
adjusted terms. Falling domestic automobile sales in Apri l signify that the private 
demand may continue to slowdown in the second quarter. The Committee judges 
that tightened financing conditions and growing uncerta inties will continue to 
suspend the durable goods demand. 
11. Foreign demand remains robust. The strong export p erformance compensates 
the negative impact of the slowdown in domestic demand on overall economic 
activity. Exports in the first quarter prevailed over imports in real terms. Leading 
indicators of April and May suggest that the strong expo rt performance continues. 
12. The robust external demand supports industrial prod uction. As suggested by 
seasonally adjusted data, industrial production displayed  a flat course in the first 
quarter. Despite the ongoing stability in industrial p roduction, the fact that last 
year’s production was highly volatile may lead to fluct uations in annual growth 
rates. Indeed, industrial production rose sharply by aro und 7.8% in the first 
quarter of 2007 owing to the base effect of last year’ s first quarter; however, in the upcoming months, it may display low annual growth rate s due to high base in the 
second quarter of 2006. 
13. Imports of capital goods rose in the first quarter, whereas machinery-
equipment investments were restrained by the low course of light commercial 
vehicle sales. April figures suggest that the slowdown in commercial vehicle sales 
continues. Production and import data on non-metallic m inerals, on the other 
hand, do not refer to any significant slowdown in constr uction activities. 
14. In sum, the recent data confirm the outlook presente d in the April Inflation 
Report. Aggregate demand conditions continue to support  disinflation. Demand 
for durable goods and machinery-equipment investment co ntinue to ease, while 
strong external demand moderates the slowdown in overa ll economic activity.  
15. The growth rate in services employment decelerated in the last three quarters. 
This trend is in line with the slowdown in economic activ ity. Moreover, industrial 
production remained relatively strong while industrial  employment displayed a 
slowdown, suggesting that labor productivity continued t o rise. 
16. The recently elevated prices of crude oil and commod ities add to the 
inflationary pressures via imported input costs and thus cu rb the disinflation 
process. These price movements are closely monitored. 
17. Market expectations for end-year inflation increased  slightly in April, possibly 
due to higher-than–expected inflation outturns. Howev er, the medium-term 
inflation expectations have not deteriorated. Inflati on expectations for the next 12 
months have been improving modestly since early 2007, w hile those for the next 
24 months stayed flat at around 5.5% in general. Medi um-term expectations 
should move downward as the disinflation process accelerate s in the upcoming 
period. 
    Monetary Policy and Risks  
18. Global bond issues of foreign financial institutions in YTL and the robust 
privatization revenues have been increasing the supply of loanable funds. These 
developments exert a downward pressure on bank lending rates. However, the 
tight stance of monetary policy and the ongoing percept ions of uncertainty 
continue to restrain the demand for credit. Accordingly,  consumer credits are 
expected to maintain their modest course in the upcoming  period. 
19. Other monetary indicators also display a similar out look. Specifically, the 
gradual slowdown in the annual growth of banknotes in circulation since the 
second half of 2006 is noteworthy. However, the inform ation included in monetary 
indicators should be handled with caution due to possible  shifts in money demand 
arising from changes in portfolio preferences or financia l system deepening. 20. The ongoing slowdown in private consumption and in vestment demand reveal 
that the monetary tightening since June 2006 is affectin g the domestic demand as 
expected. Against this background, disinflation is expected  to become more 
significant in the upcoming period. However, there are  some remaining risks to 
the inflation outlook: 
21. Possibility of stronger-than-expected inertia in in flation poses a significant risk 
for the medium-term inflation outlook. Currently, me dium-term inflation 
expectations are not aligned with the targets. Althoug h, the Committee expects 
the decline in inflation to deliver an improvement i n inflation expectations in the 
period ahead, the current course of expectations continue s to pose a significant 
risk to the inflation outlook through wage and price set ting behavior. 
22. Uncertainties over the lagged effects of monetary p olicy stand as a major risk 
to inflation outlook. The monetary tightening since Jun e 2006 is affecting the 
domestic demand as expected. The lagged effects on inflat ion are yet to be seen. 
Although the rate of increase in durable goods and serv ices prices decelerated in 
the recent period, these developments do not provide e nough evidence to claim 
that the current inflation trend is in line with medi um-term targets. In addition, the 
course of non-interest budget expenditures exacerbates th e uncertainty over the 
lagged effects of monetary policy.  
23. Recently, the developments on international liqui dity conditions and global risk 
appetite have been in favor of developing countries. However, ongoing 
uncertainties concerning global economy and volatile comm odity prices pose risk 
to inflation. Should any such shock threaten the medium- term inflation outlook, 
the Central Bank will react depending on the source of the shock. 
24. The Central Bank does not respond to temporary flu ctuations in inflation. 
Decisions of the Monetary Policy Committee are based on an overall evaluation 
of all factors affecting medium-term inflation, rather  than temporary fluctuations in 
inflation. In other words, the Central Bank decisions ar e focused on achieving 
consistency between medium-term inflation and the targe ts. In this regard, 
although disinflation is expected to become more signifi cant in the upcoming 
period, the Committee, with a medium term perspective , decided to keep the 
policy rates unchanged against the risks such as the gap betw een inflation 
expectations and targets, the backward looking pricing beh avior, elevated oil 
prices, prevailing uncertainties, and the stickiness related  to services price 
inflation. 
25. Moreover, the potential impacts of the progress in the structural reform agenda 
and the developments in incomes policy as well as public se ctor non-interest 
expenditures on inflation and inflation expectations a re carefully evaluated. Within 
this framework, the Committee assessed that meeting the m edium term inflation 
targets requires the maintenance of the tight policy sta nce.  25. Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not sufficien t for achieving price 
stability. The role of fiscal policy and structural refor ms are also critical in this 
process. Developments in structural reforms that would enh ance the quality of 
fiscal discipline are closely monitored both in terms of m acroeconomic stability 
and price stability. The European Union accession process an d the sustained 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged in t he economic program also 
remain to be of concern. Continued determination in i mplementing the decisive 
steps taken in these areas in recent years will strengthen the resilience of the 
economy against possible changes in the global economy.  