No: 2007- 30                14 November 2007 
 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: November 14, 2007 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, Mehmet 
Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) decided  to lower the policy 
rates  as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate from 16.75 to 16.25 percent , and lending 
rate from 21.50 to 20.75 percent , 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing ra te applied between 4:00 p.m. – 
5:00 p.m. from 12.75 to 12.25 percent , lending rate from 24.50 to 23.75  percent , 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturit y borrowing facilities provided for 
primary dealers via repo transactions from 20.50 to 19.75  percent . 
Readings on economic activity and inflation are in line  with the outlook presented 
in the October Inflation Report. While the demand fo r private consumption and investment 
displays recovery, external demand moderates. Aggregate  demand conditions continue to 
support disinflation. In fact, inflation excluding food  has maintained its favorable course. 
Yet, hikes in administered prices may delay the disinflat ion process in the short term. 
Notwithstanding the risks related to energy and food pr ices, inflation is expected to slow 
down in the medium term owing to the lagged effects o f strong monetary tightening. 
In light of these developments, the Committee decided to cut the borrowing rates 
by 50 basis points , and lending rates by 75 basis points . It should be underlined that 
the current level of short-term interest rates remains r estrictive even after the recent rate 
cuts. The Committee maintained the policy stance in the October Inflation Report, and 
assessed that the risks against attaining the inflation tar get in the medium run are 
balanced under a measured and cautious rate cut cycle. The  potential second round 
effects of rising food and energy prices, however, should  be closely monitored. The 
timing and extent  of further easing will depend on incoming informatio n regarding global 
liquidity conditions, external demand, public expendit ures and other determinants of the 
medium term inflation outlook. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the inflation 
outlook will lead the Committee to reconsider its stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
eight working days.  