No: 33 
27 December 2007 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting date: December 13, 2007 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices rose by 1.95 percent in November, brin ging the annual 
inflation to 8.40 percent. Administered prices accounted for about 1 
percentage point of the month-on-month increase in hea dline inflation. The 
upward trend in the prices of processed food and catering  services group 
suggest that the drought continued to be effective on fo od inflation in 
November as well. 
2. Energy prices edged up sharply in November by 6.78 p ercent, raising the 
annual inflation in this group to 11.02 percent. This was mainly attributable to 
the rise in the prices of fuel oil and LP gas, driven by  hikes in the Special 
Consumption Tax, as well as to the new municipal water t ariff in İstanbul. 
Aside from adjustments in administered prices, the recent increase in 
international oil prices was also instrumental in the ri se of energy prices. The 
planned hikes in electricity and natural gas prices in the  upcoming period, 
together with the future course of oil prices, pose a sig nificant risk to energy 
prices. 
3. Despite the decline in the prices of clothing and foo twear, the year-on-year 
inflation in goods excluding energy and unprocessed food posted an increase 
in November due to significant price hikes in processed food , tobacco 
products and gold. The prices of consumer durables, on the  other hand, 
maintained its downward trend in November. Following the tax hikes on 
tobacco products, the prices of alcoholic beverages and tobacco  group 
increased by 6.51 percent month-on-month, bringing the  annual inflation rate 
for this group to 17.21 percent. In other words, nearl y 0.85 percentage points 
of the annual CPI inflation stems from the tobacco price s. 
4. Annual services inflation slightly increased in November  due to the rise in the 
prices of recreational and cultural services, and restaurant s and hotels group. 
In line with sustained increases in food prices, catering se rvices inflation has 
been accelerating recently. The Monetary Policy Committ ee noted the 
continued slowdown in rents and transportation services inf lation and 
assessed that recent developments in services inflation were f avorable except 
for food price-driven increase in catering services inflatio n. 5. Adverse developments in food prices due to drought and  global factors have 
put an upward pressure on core inflation indicators via h igher prices of 
processed food and catering services. Yet, the Committee asse ssed that 
readings on inflation do not present an unfavorable ou tlook when food-related 
items and administered prices are excluded. Therefore, in flation is expected to 
decelerate further despite the upside risks related to fo od and energy prices. 
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation  
7. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) increased by 1.5 percent in  the third quarter of 
2007 compared with the same period of last year. Season ally adjusted figures, 
on the other hand, pointed to a 0.6 percent decline o ver the second quarter. 
Domestic demand gave a strong boost to GDP, while the pu blic sector 
contributed to growth at a slower rate; the contributi on of net foreign demand, 
however, was noticeably negative. While the lagged effe cts of the monetary 
tightening have continued, albeit at a weaker rate, te mporary supply shocks in 
the agricultural sector have accentuated the slowdown in e conomic activity. 
8. The contribution of private consumption demand to gr owth improved 
significantly over the third quarter, consistent with the  leading indicators 
reported in previous reports. In seasonally adjusted term s, private 
consumption demand, which has grown modestly since mid-200 6, increased 
by 2.3 percent in this period compared to the previous q uarter, mainly on the 
back of spending on durables and semi- or non-durables.  
9. Despite the rebound in private consumption demand, t he pace of public 
consumption showed little change from previous quarters, w hereas restrictive 
measures on the fiscal side has shown its impact on public in vestments. The 
recovery in domestic demand was mainly driven by private co nsumption, 
whereas private investments lost momentum on a quarterly basis. 
10. Leading indicators for the fourth quarter points t o a moderate recovery in 
economic activity. Industrial production grew by 7.9 perce nt year-on-year in 
October and was up markedly from September in seasonally  adjusted terms. 
Indicators for private consumption and investment demand a lso suggest a 
similar outlook. According to the seasonally adjusted data , following a 
downbeat reading in September, domestic sales of automo biles grew rapidly 
in the October-November period compared to the third q uarter. The CNBC-e 
consumption index also exceeded its third-quarter average. Moreover, imports 
of consumer goods jumped in October compared to the same month last year. 
Seasonally adjusted domestic sales of white goods also rebo unded in October 
but remained below the third-quarter average. 11. Consumer loans also continue to increase at moderate rates. The Committee 
assessed that, in addition to the lagged effects of monet ary tightening, 
ongoing problems in global credit markets were restrictive  on the growth of 
consumer loans in the fourth quarter of 2007. 
12. The Committee underlined the essence of investments f or the sustained 
productivity gains. Despite a slowdown in machinery-equip ment production, 
imports of machinery-equipment gained speed in October over September and 
also the preceding quarter. In addition, both producti on and imports in the 
electrical machinery industry increased significantly on a year-on-year and per 
quarter basis. Following a rebound in the third quart er, domestic sales of light 
commercial vehicles recorded high growth rates during the October-November 
period compared to the previous quarter. Imports of capi tal goods grew 
sharply by 41.3 percent in October on a year-on-year b asis and seasonally 
adjusted figures point to a continued acceleration. In su m, leading indicators 
except for machinery-equipment production suggest that in vestments picked 
up in the fourth quarter on a yearly and quarterly basis. 
13. Exports continue to expand owing to productivity gain s and on the back of 
strong external demand. Preliminary data indicate that  exports recorded a high 
growth rate in November in dollar terms. Nevertheless, a ccording to quantity 
indices that exclude the price effect, real exports grew at  a lower pace than 
real imports in the second half of the year. The streng thening demand for 
imported goods, particularly automobiles and commercial vehicles and other 
capital goods, signal that the contribution of net fore ign demand to growth will 
continue to be negative in the last quarter. 
14. To sum up, the modest recovery of the private demand  continues, while 
aggregate demand conditions continue to support the disi nflation process on 
the back of slowdown in public expenditures and net extern al demand. 
15. The Committee noted that the recent labor market developments also contain 
valuable information on the current state of the econom y. Readings on 
seasonally adjusted figures showed that the growth rate of services 
employment, particularly in wholesale/retail trade an d in restaurants/hotels, 
has been slowing down since mid-2006. This trend became m ore pronounced 
in the third quarter of 2007. Accordingly, the decline  in non-farm 
unemployment rate came to a halt in the past year. Lo oser labor market is 
likely to restrain wage inflation in the overall econom y. 
16. While employment in the industrial sector posted a year-on-year decrease in 
the third quarter of 2007, labor productivity has main tained its upward trend. 
Current trends in employment and production suggest tha t unit labor costs will 
slightly decline in the fourth quarter of 2007 owing to continued rise in 
productivity.  
  Monetary Policy and Risks 
17. Drought and energy related supply shocks not only in crease inflation 
temporarily but also have short term adverse effects on gr owth. In fact, the 
contraction in the agricultural output in 2007 explains much of the recent 
dynamics in inflation and output. The Committee under lined that the primary 
goal of the Central Bank of Turkey (the CBT) is to achi eve price stability, and 
noted that monetary policy remains restrictive even after  the recent rate cuts. 
18. The CBT is focused on attaining the medium term in flation target of 4 percent, 
in a framework where monetary policy does not react to temporary and 
exogenous shocks. The Committee, judging the recent rise in  inflation as 
temporary, maintained the policy stance presented in th e October Inflation 
Report, and assessed that, under a measured and cautious r ate cut cycle, the 
risks against attaining the inflation target in the med ium run are balanced. The 
timing and extent of further easing will depend on in coming information 
regarding global liquidity conditions, external demand , fiscal policy 
implementation and other factors affecting the medium term inflation outlook. 
Risks to the inflation and monetary policy outlook can be  summarized as 
follows: 
19. Ongoing uncertainties in global financial markets ha d an adverse impact on 
consumer and investor confidence. It has also tightened cred it conditions, 
laying the ground for measured and cautious rate cuts. N onetheless, there are 
still difficulties in assessing the overall risk. Uncertaintie s on global risk 
appetite and the extent of slowdown in global growth persist, which poses 
risks on the outlook for monetary policy. 
20. Food prices remain as an important risk factor for in flation. Besides the 
drought-related factors, increased demand for bio-fuels drives up world prices 
for many farm products such as corn and wheat. Although t here is some 
chance of a downward correction in unprocessed food prices, the processed 
food prices are likely to follow an elevated course in th e short term. Yet, food 
inflation is expected to normalize in the medium term.  
21. Although administered prices led to a rise in headl ine inflation recently, the 
impact on medium term expectations was rather limited. H owever, potential 
second round impacts of the planned hikes in electricity an d natural gas prices  
compels the Committee to be cautious. 
22. Accordingly, potential effects of rising food and en ergy prices on overall price 
setting behavior in the economy will be closely monitore d. 23. Finally, it should be emphasized that the support of fiscal policy and structural 
reforms are critical for achieving and maintaining price stability. Particularly, 
advances in structural reforms that would enhance the qual ity of fiscal 
discipline are monitored closely with regard to their i mplications on 
macroeconomic and price stability. Sustaining the producti vity gains is 
essential for attaining price stability while preserving high growth rates. In this 
respect, the European Union accession process and the implem entation of 
structural reforms envisaged in the economic program, which  will ensure the 
sustainability of productivity gains, remain to be critica l. 
 