No: 2007- 11  
14 May 2007 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: May 14, 2007 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, 
Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has deci ded to keep short-
term interest rates (policy rates) unchanged as follows: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 17.50  percent, and lending rate at 
22.50  percent, 
b)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate  applied between 4:00 p.m. – 
4:30 p.m. at 13.50  percent, lending rate at 25.50  percent, 
c)  The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity  borrowing facilities provided 
for primary dealers via repo transactions at 21.50  percent. 
 
Recent data on economic activity is broadly consistent with  the outlook 
presented in the April Inflation Report. While the sl owdown in private consumption 
demand continues, foreign demand remains relatively str ong. Aggregate demand 
conditions continue to support disinflation. Against this background, disinflation is 
expected to become more significant in the upcoming peri od. Besides, the 
Committee noted that a partial correction in unprocessed  food prices, and the base 
effect may contribute to the decline in annual inflati on in May. However, the 
Committee, with a medium term perspective, decided to keep the policy rates 
unchanged against the risks such as the gap between inflati on expectations and 
targets, the backward looking pricing behavior, elevated  oil prices, prevailing 
uncertainties, and the stickiness related to services price in flation. 
The monetary tightening since June 2006 is affecting the  domestic demand 
as expected. The lagged effects on inflation are yet to  be seen. The potential 
impacts of the progress in the structural reform agenda a nd the developments in 
incomes policy as well as public sector non-interest expendi tures on inflation and 
inflation expectations are carefully evaluated. Within  this framework, the Committee 
assesses that meeting the medium term inflation targets r equires the maintenance 
of the tight policy stance. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the 
inflation outlook will lead the Committee to reconside r its stance. 
A brief summary of the assessments of the Committee will be released within 
eight working days. 