 No: 2007-09 
 
                27 April 2007 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 18 April 2007 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. In March, consumer prices increased by 0.92% and the an nual inflation rate 
rose up to 10.86%. The relatively high cumulative inf lation in the first quarter can 
be mainly attributed to soaring fruit and vegetable prices and tax-driven price 
hikes in tobacco products. Surging tobacco prices pushed total  consumer inflation 
up by 0.5 percentage points.  The moderation in annua l inflation of unprocessed 
food prices in March was basically driven by descending pri ces of items other 
than fruits and vegetables. The 11.74% rise in unprocesse d food prices in the first 
quarter, due to an increase in fruit and vegetable pr ices above seasonal norms, 
highlights that the risks related to price developments i n this group are still 
notable.  
2. The increase in the prices of petroleum products acceler ated in March parallel 
to the developments in the global oil market, but the  annual inflation in the energy 
component of the housing subgroup eased. The first quart er rise in the overall 
energy index remained more modest compared to the pre vious year. 
3. Annual goods inflation ascended in the first quarter , mainly due to the base 
effect resulting from the decline in prices of particular ly durable goods associated 
with the appreciation of TRY in the first quarter of 2006. Moreover, first-quarter 
discounts in clothing remained below year-ago levels and  added to the annual 
goods inflation. These developments altogether led to an increase in the annual 
inflation of Special CPI aggregates. 
4. The annual rate of increase in the prices of several services sub-items has 
been displaying a limited slowdown, yet there has been  no significant 
improvement in the overall pricing behavior.  Howeve r, the slowdown in domestic 
demand is expected to have lagged effects on services price s. 
5. In addition, a notable base effect stemming from la st year’s market turbulence 
and the adverse supply shocks such as the hikes in energy and unprocessed 
food prices is expected to ease annual inflation in the coming months.  
Accordingly, the disinflation trend is expected to become  discernible starting from 
the second quarter of 2007.   
  Factors Affecting Inflation  
6. The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) ide ntifies the recent data on 
economic activity as broadly consistent with the outlook pr esented in the January 
Inflation Report: 
7. The slowdown in private consumption demand continues.  The sustained 
decline in automobile and white goods sales in the first  quarter signifies that the 
slowdown in demand for durable goods continues to curb p rivate consumption. 
The data on consumer credits, another indicator of consump tion expenditures, 
also suggest a similar outlook. Motor vehicle loans continu e to decrease, while 
other sub-items of consumer credits do not reveal a notab le increase compared to 
the second half of 2006. These developments coupled with  the high base of the 
first half of 2006 reveal that annual growth in priv ate consumption expenditures 
will not display a significant change in the first half of 2007. 
8. Foreign demand remains relatively strong. The nega tive impact of the 
slowdown in domestic demand on economic growth is largely  compensated by 
the robust foreign demand. In the first two months of 2007 exports increased 
more than imports in real terms. Leading indicators on March and April figures 
suggest that the strong export performance continues. 
9. Investment expenditures did not change notably over  the last quarter of 2006. 
In January and February, seasonally adjusted capital goo ds imports rose over the 
fourth quarter of 2006, whereas commercial vehicle sales dropped, driven by light 
commercial vehicles. Manufacturing of electrical machinery and electronics 
maintains its quarter-ago levels. On the other hand, d ata on construction permits 
suggest that the construction sector continues to grow at a rapid pace. 
10. Although In January and February the industrial p roduction index displayed 
high annual growth rates, this development mainly owe s to the base effect. 
Seasonally adjusted data do not refer to any accelerati on in industrial production. 
The ongoing favorable export performance supports indu strial production, but the 
slowdown in domestic demand constrains it. The fact that e xports remained 
robust in March indicates that industrial production main tained its upward trend in 
March, albeit at a slower pace than in January and Febr uary. Between April and 
June, industrial production may temporarily display low  annual growth rates led by 
base effects. 
11. In sum, strong foreign demand is expected to support  growth in the first half of 
the year, but the slowdown in domestic demand will cont inue to restrain the 
aggregate demand. In this respect, aggregate demand con ditions will support 
disinflation. 12. Recent data indicate that employment in services mai ntained a modest growth 
rate since July 2006. This trend is in line with the slow down in economic activity. 
Moreover, export-led industrial production remained r elatively strong while 
industrial employment displayed a slowdown over the la st quarter of 2006, 
suggesting that labor productivity continued to rise. 
13. The recent surge in crude oil prices is worth noting and the concurrent rise in 
other commodity prices increases the risks related to cost-pus h shocks. The 
elevated levels of the oil and other commodity prices r equire close monitoring. 
14. In the recent period, end-2007 inflation expectat ions displayed a slight 
increase possibly owing to the high inflation outturns i n the first quarter. Yet, the 
medium-term inflation expectations have not deteriora ted, pointing that the agents 
perceived the rise in inflation temporary. However, t he Committee considers the 
gap between medium-term inflation expectations and th e targets as a risk to price 
setting behavior.  
  Monetary Policy and Risks  
15. Private consumption demand continued to slow down i n the first quarter. This 
development suggests that the transmission mechanism of mon etary policy 
began to function significantly. Yet, the increased cauti on in spending behavior of 
economic agents, due to heightened risk perceptions, added  to the slowdown in 
private consumer demand. 
16. Recently, increasing domestic market liquidity coupled  with improved external 
borrowing conditions has eased credit supply conditions. Th e declining need to 
keep high rollover ratios in Treasury’s debt servicing, a nd CBT’s FX buying 
auctions contribute to the rise in the market liquidity.  Another factor to help 
enhance banks’ borrowing facilities is the favorable course  of TRY-denominated 
bonds issued by foreign institutions. In addition, non-r esidents continue to raise 
their holdings in Turkey. A joint evaluation of all t hese developments reveals that 
banks’ loanable funds are on a rise. 
17. Despite the improvement in credit supply conditions,  the high level of bank 
loan rates, backed by CBT’s cautious stance, continues to rest rain credit demand. 
Although the interest rates on loans have recently fall en, they still remain very 
high compared to the first quarter of 2006. Therefore , unless interest rates fall 
down to lower levels, the growth rate in consumer credi ts will remain contained in 
the short term.  
18. The Committee reviewed the inflation projections to appear in the April 
Inflation Report and concluded that there had been som e developments that 
would necessitate an update in the inflation outlook pr esented in January Inflation 
Report. These developments can be listed as follows: 19. Firstly, considering the revisions in the 2006 GDP f igures, the lagged 
contribution of demand conditions to disinflation is now  assumed to be slightly 
less than the level set out in the January Inflation Re port. Secondly, the 
Committee observed that unprocessed food prices still lack t he expected 
correction and that tobacco products suffered tax-driven p rice hike. Furthermore, 
the decrease in annual services inflation is deemed to be  less-than-expected, 
although some sub-items displayed improvements. Lastly, o il-price assumption is 
revised upward with regard to the surges in oil prices. Consequently, inflation 
forecasts are revised up. 
20. The above-summarized updates indicate that further  caution might be required 
compared to the January Inflation Report of 2007, to make sure that the medium-
term outlook is consistent with the targets. Therefore, t he Committee decided to 
enhance the cautious policy stance, as stated in April Infl ation Report, against the 
risks such as the gap between inflation expectations and ta rgets, the backward 
looking pricing behavior, increase in oil prices, prevail ing uncertainties, and the 
stickiness related to services price inflation. 
21. The potential impacts of the progress in the structur al reform agenda and the 
developments in incomes policy as well as public sector non- interest expenditures 
on inflation and inflation expectations are carefully evaluated. Within this 
framework, the Committee assessed that meeting the mediu m term inflation 
targets requires the maintenance of the tight policy sta nce. 
22. A joint evaluation of the current policy stance and  other factors affecting 
inflation suggests that the disinflation trend will beco me more discernible starting 
from the second quarter of the year. However, risks rema in to inflation outlook: 
23. The monetary tightening since June 2006 is affecting  the domestic demand as 
expected. The lagged effects on inflation are yet to b e seen. Recent data is 
broadly consistent with the main outlook presented throu gout the Inflation Reports 
since July 2006. The impact of monetary tightening in t he second half of 2006 on 
the demand is visible especially through the slowdown in  the expenditures of 
durable goods and machinery-equipment. Robust performa nce of exports has 
been offsetting the contractionary impact of the slowdow n in private domestic 
demand and contributing positively to the economic grow th rate. Nevertheless, 
uncertainties over the monetary transmission mechanism pre vail to be a risk for 
medium-term inflation outlook. While the recent hikes i n public expenditures seem 
to further blur the outlook, the proposed cut-down in certain non-interest public 
expenditure items have somewhat relieved these concerns. In sum, a lower-than-
expected impact of slowdown in domestic demand on inflat ion still remains as a 
risk factor. Should such a risk materalize, the CBT may fu rther tighten the policy 
stance. 24. Another risk related to the medium-term inflation  outlook is the stickiness in 
inflation expectations and backward looking price setting which would lead to a 
higher-than-expected inertia in the disinflation proce ss. The improvement in 
inflation expectations came to a halt in the last three  months. Although the 
expectations should come down gradually as the headline inflation eases, the 
sticky medium-term inflation expectations remain to be a  risk for the inflation 
outlook through its possible reflections on the price and wage setting behavior. 
The CBT will keep its cautious stance for an extended per iod should such risk 
materialize. 
25. Possible fluctuations in global markets remain as a ri sk to the inflation outlook. 
The prevailing uncertainties on the US economy and on global imbalances still 
have the potential to trigger fluctuations in interna tional markets which may have 
adverse impact on emerging economies. Moreover, the ele vated levels of the oil 
prices do not help to ease the risks related to global fi nancial markets. On the 
other hand, the Treasury’s strong cash accounts and the rece nt slowdown in the 
deterioration of the current account have the potentia l to mitigate the impact of 
possible fluctuations in the financial markets. In what so ever, should a shock lead 
to heigthened perception of uncertainty, the CBT will  retain the medium-term 
perspective and announce the appropriate strategy to br ing inflation back to the 
target. 
26. Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not sufficien t for achieving long-run 
price stability. The role of fiscal policy and structural reforms are also critical in 
this process. Developments in structural reforms that would  enhance the quality 
of fiscal discipline in the medium and long run are close ly monitored both in terms 
of macroeconomic stability and price stability. The  Euro pean Union accession 
process and the sustained implementation of the structural  reforms envisaged in 
the economic program also remain to be of concern. Conti nued determination in 
implementing the decisive steps taken in these areas in re cent years will 
strengthen the resilience of the economy against possible changes in the global 
economy.  
  
 