No: 2007- 08 
18 April 2007 
 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: April 18, 2007 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, 
Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has deci ded to keep short-
term interest rates (policy rates) unchanged as follows: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 17.50  percent, and lending rate at 
22.50  percent, 
b)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate  applied between 4:00 p.m. – 
4:30 p.m. at 13.50  percent, lending rate at 25.50  percent, 
c)  The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity borrowing facilities provided 
for primary dealers via repo transactions at 21.50  percent. 
 
The Committee evaluates the recent data on economic activi ty as broadly 
consistent with the outlook presented in the January Infl ation Report. While the 
slowdown in private consumption demand continues, foreign  demand remains 
relatively strong. Aggregate demand conditions continue to support disinflation. 
Against this background, the disinflation trend is expected  to become discernible 
starting from the second quarter of 2007. Nevertheless, t he Committee decided to 
enhance the cautious policy stance against the risks such as the  gap between 
inflation expectations and targets, the backward looking p ricing behavior, increase in 
oil prices, prevailing uncertainties, and the stickiness rela ted to services price 
inflation. 
The monetary tightening since June 2006 is affecting the  domestic demand 
as expected. The lagged effects on inflation are yet to be seen. The potential 
impacts of the progress in the structural reform agenda a nd the developments in 
incomes policy as well as public sector non-interest expendit ures on inflation and 
inflation expectations are carefully evaluated. Within t his framework, the Committee 
assesses that meeting the medium term inflation targets r equires the maintenance 
of the tight policy stance. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the 
inflation outlook will lead the Committee to reconside r its stance. 
A brief summary of the assessments of the Committee will be released within 
eight working days. 