 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MONETARY AND EXCHANGE RATE POLICY 
FOR 2007  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey 
13 DECEMBER 2006  1 
GENERAL FRAMEWORK OF THE MONETARY POLICY 
 
A Brief Evaluation of the First Year of the Inflati on Targeting Regime  
1. The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (Central Ba nk) adopted the formal 
inflation-targeting regime at the turn of 2006, and  since that time has 
implemented a policy consistent with the principles laid out in the policy 
statement entitled “General Framework of Inflation Ta rgeting Regime And 
Monetary And Exchange Rate Policy for 2006” and release d on 5 th  of 
December, 2005.  
2. Four Inflation Reports have been published in 2006, in  January, April, July and 
October. These reports have explicated the Central Bank’s i nflation forecasts 
and policy perspectives. The main messages of the reports ha ve been shared 
with the public each time in by means of press conferences.   
3. The Monetary Policy Committee (Committee) held regul ar meetings 
throughout 2006, in addition to the interim meeting s held in June, in line with 
the pre-announced annual timetable to determine poli cy rates. Press releases 
explaining the rationale of decisions and the Committee ’s policy stance have 
been published along with interest rate decisions. Moreo ver, the summary 
reports of the Committee’s discussions have been released wi thin five working 
days following the meetings. 
4. In the first year of the inflation-targeting regime,  some supply-side shocks 
were experienced, which caused inflation to materialize above the path 
consistent with the target. The Central Bank explained t he reasons of this 
deviation through open letters written to the Governme nt, took the necessary 
measures to put inflation back on track consistent with the target and shared 
its evaluations pertaining to the timing of convergence t o the target with the 
public in a transparent manner.  
5. These implementations not only strengthened the communi cation framework 
of monetary policy, but also played an important role  in shaping the 
expectations. Although the inflation rate has stabilized  at around 10 percent-
level for a long time due to the supply-side shocks experie nced in 2006, the 
fact that the inflation expectations for the next 24 mon ths is around 5.5 percent 
as of today is a clear evidence of the success achieved in the  inflation-
targeting. However, being ultimately focused on price st ability, the Central 
Bank cannot be content with what has been achieved until medium-term 
expectations are consistent with the target. 
6. As a result, important steps were taken in 2006 on the w ay to transparency, 
accountability and predictability, which are the main p rinciples of the inflation-
targeting regime. This press release aims to review the st rategic as well as the 
operational framework of monetary policy in light of the first year’s experience 
and to lay down the principles for 2007. In the first part of the text, the general 
framework of monetary policy will be presented, and in  the second part 
exchange rate policy and liquidity management issues will  be considered.   2Inflation Targets 
7. Inflation targets will continue to be defined as the e nd-year rate of inflation 
calculated by the annual percentage change of the Consum er Price Index 
(CPI) in the upcoming period. In the press release rega rding the monetary and 
exchange rate policy for 2006, the target horizon was se t as three years and 
this time frame will be preserved for 2007. Taking into  account the structural 
transformation of the economy, the transition from chro nic high inflation to low 
inflation, and the process of convergence to the developed  countries, a target 
of around 4 percent is considered appropriate for the m edium-term. Therefore, 
inflation targets for 2007 and 2008, which were previo usly announced as 4 
percent, are maintained and the inflation target for  2009, which was scheduled 
to be announced at the end of this year, has also been determined as 4 
percent. As the structural transformation and convergence p rocess is 
completed in time, it will be possible to target lower  inflation rates. 
 
Uncertainty Band 
8. In Article 42 of the CBRT Law it is stipulated that “T he Bank shall submit 
information to the Government in writing and inform the public disclosing the 
reasons for the incapability to achieve the determined t argets in due time 
published or the occurrence of the possibility of not achi eving and the 
measures to be taken thereof”. However, it does not specif y the size of the 
deviation from the target that will require such an exp lanation. Therefore, in 
order to clarify this mechanism and facilitate its operat ion, the Central Bank 
has set a symmetrical uncertainty band of 2 percentage po ints in both 
directions around the point target .  
9. It has been decided to keep the uncertainty band around  the target at 2 
percent for 2007 as well. The path consistent with the e nd-year target and the 
uncertainty bands defined for the end of each quarter of 2007 are shown in 
Table 1. In case the figures go outside the band, the C entral Bank shall submit 
a separate report to the Government disclosing the reason s for the deviation 
and the measures to be taken for convergence to the targe t and share this 
report with the public. The path shown in Table 1 wil l also be used as 
performance criterion for the IMF reviews within the fr amework of the Stand-by 
program. 
 
Table 1: Inflation Path Consistent With the End-Yea r Target And The 
Uncertainty Band  
   March  June September December 
Uncertainty Band 
(upper limit) 11,2 8,7 7,3 6,0 
  Path Consistent 
with the Target 9,2 6,7 5,3 4,0 
Uncertainty Band 
(Lower Limit) 7,2 4,7 3,3 2,0 
  3 
The Difference Between The Targets and Forecasts 
10. In last year’s policy statement regarding the general f ramework of the inflation-
targeting regime, it was stated that the inflation ta rget would only be changed 
in the event that sharp and long-term deviations from t he target are expected 
or the medium-term targets no longer make sense due to factors beyond the 
control of monetary policy. It was also stated that temp orary shocks would only 
change inflation forecasts rather than inflation target s and the points of 
reference to be used by economic agents would be inflati on forecasts for the 
short-term and the inflation target for the medium-t erm. This policy approach 
was put into practice after the supply-side shocks of 2006. The inflation 
forecasts were updated in July and it was announced that inflation would stand 
well above the end-year inflation target; however, th e target for end-2006 was 
not changed. Accordingly, the economic agents have taken th e inflation 
forecasts announced by the Central Bank for end-2006 as a  point of reference 
instead of the end-year inflation target for 2006. I n fact, inflation expectations 
for end-2006 are in line with the Central Bank’s fore casts.  
11. It is not something exceptional for the countries impleme nting inflation-
targeting regime to experience significant deviations fro m the inflation target. 
What matters most here is to be able to explain the rea sons for the deviation, 
to take necessary measures to ensure that the target could be attained again 
and to inform the public of the convergence period. If the Central Bank had 
changed its inflation target for end-2006 as 10 percent , it would have achieved 
the end-year target and would not have been liable t o be called to account to 
the public. However, instead of changing the target, th e Central Bank 
preferred to render account to foster its communication p olicy. Within this 
framework, the Central Bank will inform the Government  through a new open 
letter in January 2007 and explain the reasons for oversh ooting the end-year 
inflation target, in addition to sharing its projectio ns pertaining to the 
convergence process with the public.  
12. In conclusion, the Central Bank considers that frequent cha nges in targets are 
likely to have adverse effects on inflation expectations and  pricing behaviors, 
which could damage the credibility of the future commit ments. For this reason, 
it is important in the upcoming period that targets sho uld be left intact as long 
as inflation is expected to converge to targets within a r easonable period of 
time.  
 
Transmission Mechanism and Control Horizon 
13. Central banks in both developed and developing countries experience serious 
uncertainties regarding the lagged effects of monetary policy on inflation. 
Considering the fact that the relationship between macr oeconomic variables 
changed remarkably along with the structural transformat ion in the economy 
after the 2001 crisis, it is assessed that the mentioned un certainty in Turkey is 
at least as high as those in other countries.  
14. However, in light of the recent normalization experien ce, it is possible to 
produce forecasts about the period required for monetar y policy to influence  4inflation. The latest observations indicate that the per iod needed for monetary 
policy measures to affect domestic demand varies between 3 to 9 months, 
while the change in demand influences inflation in a p eriod between 3 months 
and 1 year. This leads us to the conclusion that the impa cts of monetary policy 
on inflation spread over a period of one and a half y ears on average.  
15. In this context, taking into account the lagged impacts of monetary policy, the 
Central Bank defined the policy horizon as approximatel y one and a half years 
in the main policy statement published last year. Altho ugh it is forecasted that 
the impact of monetary policy on inflation will show i tself in a more lagged 
manner and that the control horizon may be extended a s the normalization 
process of the economy continues, the control horizon is ma intained as one 
and a half years at this stage. There is no doubt that this period may be 
extended or shortened depending on the extent of shocks an d the period 
needed for their influence to reflect on prices. The im pacts of various shocks 
on inflation may differ according to time and period.  As a consequence, the 
period required for inflation to converge to the targ et again will be announced 
after the occurrence of shocks and the determination of th eir sources, if there 
is a significant deviation from the target.  
Forecast Horizon 
16. The forecasts presented in the Inflation Reports publishe d throughout 2006, 
covered a period of one and a half years. From 2007 on wards, forecasts will 
refer to a two-years period. This change aims to help e conomic agents to 
predict the future better. Furthermore, forming a com parable forecast period 
with the results of the Expectations Survey will provide u s with the opportunity 
to analyze and assess inflation forecasts more easily. 1 
 
Inflation Forecasts and Interest Rate Path 
17. While producing inflation forecasts, one of the most crit ical questions to be 
answered is how the monetary policy is shaped over the fo recast horizon. 
Country experiences reveal that there are many differen t approaches related 
to the presentation of forecasts and the method of signa ling future monetary 
policy. Accordingly, central banks can be classified into thr ee groups: 
(i) Countries in which central banks produce inflation fo recasts 
by considering their own potential policy responses: New 
Zealand, Norway, Canada, Sweden, Czech Republic, 
Turkey, Columbia, Peru, Rumania. In addition, these 
countries announce their forecasts on the interest rate pa th 
in verbal or numerical terms.  
(ii) Countries where central banks employ the market 
expectations: European Union (European Central Bank), 
Chile, Brazil, Czech Republic, Sweden, and England. I n this 
framework, the expected short-term interest rate path is 
calculated via the yield curve, expectations survey and 
                                                
1 In the survey, the farthest period of time given f or inflation expectations is 2 years.   
  5other sources and inflation forecasts are published under 
the assumption that this path will materialize.  
(iii) Countries in which central banks assume that interes t rate 
will remain fixed over the forecast horizon: England, B razil, 
Peru, and Australia. 2 
18. In recent years, both academic literature and current cen tral banking 
implementations increasingly support the approach adopte d by the first group, 
including Turkey for sharing the own expectations of the central banks about 
future monetary policy with the public corresponds to th e transparency and 
predictability principles of inflation targeting. In t his context, it is observed that 
more countries from second and third groups join the fir st group each year.  
 
Monetary Policy and Interest Rate Risk 
19. As mentioned above, the Central Bank shares its forecasts ab out monetary 
policy verbally with the public. When evaluating the in flation and monetary 
policy outlook, a particular question to be answered is r aised: How should the 
policy perspective that will keep inflation close to the t arget in the medium-
term (in a period of one and a half years to two yea rs) be? The answers to this 
question as provided in the Inflation Reports published in 2006 were as 
follows:  
• JANUARY 2006: “...  a short-term interest rate path re maining constant for 
the first couple of months in 2006 and displaying a gra dual decline 
thereafter...” 
• APRIL 2006: “...where the Central Bank continues to cut  policy rates 
gradually...” 
• JULY 2006: “... in addition to the measures of June, th e Central Bank will 
implement measured monetary tightening in the rest of  2006 and cut policy 
rates gradually in 2007...” 
• OCTOBER 2006: “under the scenario that the Central Ba nk maintains its 
tight stance until the last quarter of 2007 and cuts pol icy interest rates 
afterwards...” 
20. As it is clearly seen above, as long as there was not a sign ificant shock in the 
economy, the Central Bank acted in parallel to its earl ier statements. However 
it had to revise its monetary policy stance after importa nt shocks such as the 
market volatilities of May and June. It is more evident i n light of these this 
example that, as it is frequently emphasized in our ann ouncements, the 
interest rate path, which is used by the Central Bank in  producing forecasts, 
should not be perceived as a commitment to be followed i n every case. 
Hence, the interest rate risk should be assessed by considerin g the fact that 
the outlook presented in the Inflation Report is subject  to change depending 
on the data flow, and thus, the policy perspective can be  updated whenever 
                                                
2 Some central banks follow more than one method whi le producing forecasts about interest rates.  For i nstance, 
Bank of England is in both the second group (expect ations for market interest rates) and third group ( fixed interest 
rate).   6necessary. Since the end of 2005, the Central Bank has re peatedly drawn 
attention to this matter via the Inflation Report and  other policy documents.  
 
Special CPI Aggregates and Core Inflation 
21. Instead of considering a single so-called core indicator, t he Central Bank uses 
more than one indicator in the differentiation of var ious exogenous shocks. 
Thus, depending on the source of shocks, different indicato rs may stand out 
from time to time. For instance, the index that excludes the energy item in a 
period where oil prices display high increases or the ind ex that excludes the 
unprocessed food group in a period where agricultural p rices fluctuate 
excessively may contain more comprehensive information in or der to achieve 
a better understanding of the main inflation trend. 
 
22. Special CPI aggregates produced will continue to be a p art of the forward-
looking inflation analysis and the communication policy o f the Central Bank. As 
of 2005, TURKSTAT started to publish 7 special CPI aggr egates and 
beginning from September 2006 the H index composed by excluding energy, 
alcoholic beverages-tobacco, unprocessed food, and gold has st arted to be 
published. Currently, even though the H index seems to b e relatively in the 
forefront, it should be kept in mind that this index is sensitive to developments 
in FX rates and it could provide incomplete information  in periods when FX 
rates are highly volatile. In such periods it would be a ppropriate  to support the 
data from the H index with other indexes that have low FX rate pass-through 
(for example; evaluating them with service prices inflatio n). 
23. Hence, the Central Bank will not use only one indicator  to assess the main 
trend in inflation and will openly inform the publi c of the type of the relevant 
indicator and the degree of its importance. Moreover, a fter reaching a 
satisfactory number of observations, new indices can be compi led based on 
different techniques and the SCA can be updated. 
 
Public Sector’s Role in the Inflation Targeting Reg ime 
24. In the inflation-targeting regime, developments in th e public sector are a 
matter of concern from the monetary policy perspective. T he CBRT certainly 
cannot control polices implemented by the public sector. H owever, the fact 
that the size of the public sector relative to the econom y is still large makes it 
necessary to closely monitor the developments in this area.  In accordance 
with its law, a central bank, which focuses on price stabili ty, has to monitor 
developments in budget and fiscal policy and has to react to the possible 
repercussions of these policies on inflation. 
25. Policies of the public sector have the potential to affect  the inflation outlook 
through various channels. The first channel comprises expectat ions. Further 
enhancement of fiscal discipline through its continuity wi ll increase the 
effectiveness and predictability of monetary policy by ext ending the borrowing 
maturities and reducing risk premiums and the volatilitie s in risk premiums and 
facilitate the management of inflation expectations.   726. Pricing behavior of goods and services produced or controlle d by the public 
sector itself or the indirect taxation channel has a direct  effect on inflation. In 
this framework, pricing goods and services produced by the p ublic sector 
rationally and enhancing the quality of fiscal disciplin e is crucial in terms of the 
predictability of inflation. 
27. Another channel, which affects inflation and inflation expectations, is the 
incomes policy of the public sector. One of the main dete rminants of 
expectations for price and wage inflation in Turkey is th e increase in wages 
made by the public sector to its own employees. Wage incr eases in the public 
sector may set a precedent for the private sector. In this context, the 
consistent trend of the incomes policy with the inflation  target is significant in 
terms of achieving the inflation-targets more easily and  quickly. 
28. One of the main components of total demand is the publ ic sector’s direct 
purchase of goods and services. Therefore, while evaluating  developments 
regarding the inflation outlook, the Central Bank care fully monitors public 
expenditures as well. 
29. The Central Bank takes into consideration the budget pro jections while setting 
the inflation targets and the monetary policy perspecti ve and hence, makes 
various assumptions regarding the channels mentioned above.  In case of an 
unpredicted development in one of the channels, the pol icy stance needs to 
be updated. 
 
Monetary Policy Committee Meetings and the Decision -Making Process  
30. The Monetary Policy Committee will continue to meet o nce a month in the 
upcoming period as it has done since 2001 and as stipulate d by Central Bank 
Law. The meeting will continue to be held in two sessio ns. The first session 
will start at 1:00 pm and will host the Central Bank a uthorities and specialists 
as well as authorities from the Undersecretariat of Trea sury. In this session, 
the related bodies of the Central Bank will present th eir reports on evaluations 
about economic developments and inflation outlook to the  Monetary Policy 
Committee. At the same time, the authorities from the  Undersecretariat of 
Treasury will present their evaluations on the developme nts in debt 
management and fiscal policy to the Committee. In the second session, the 
Committee members will make the final evaluations about  the outlook and the 
decision will be put to a vote. After making a decision, members of the 
Committee will prepare a brief report explaining the  rationale of the decision. 
The decision and its rationale will be announced by the  Central Bank in a 
press release before 7:00 pm on the same day, and it wi ll also be posted on 
the website of the Bank. A significant change in the upco ming period is that 
the Turkish version and the English translation of the de cision will be 
published on the same day. 
 
Other Policy Statements and Important Dates  
31. The Central Bank will continue to publish main policy st atements regularly in 
2007 as well. Within this framework:  8•• ••    The Inflation Report  will continue to be published quarterly. 
 
•• ••    The Financial Stability Report  will be published twice a year on previously 
announced dates.  
 
•• ••    The statement entitled Summary of the Monetary Policy Committee 
Discussions  will be published within 8 working days  following the meeting with 
the title Summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting, alongside its 
English translation. 
 
•• ••    As of July 2006 the “ Price Developments”  report started to be published to 
provide an accurate understanding of inflation data. Th is report will be 
published within 2 working days  following the announcement of inflation data. 
 
•• ••    Besides all these statements, presentations and speeches made  by the 
Governor and the Committee members will be shared with  the public from time 
to time. 
 
• Moreover, the research papers, booklets, and technical note s published by the 
Central Bank and organized conferences will continue to be a part of the 
communication policy. 
32. The publication calendar for the Inflation Report and  the Financial Stability 
Report along with the Monetary Policy Committee Meet ing dates are 
presented in the Appendix. Meeting dates have been dete rmined by taking 
into account such factors as official holidays, national and  religious festivals, 
and the data flow calendar. 
 
 
EXCHANGE RATE POLICY AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE BUYING 
AUCTIONS  
 
33. Along with inflation targeting, the Central Bank wil l continue to implement a 
floating exchange rate regime in the upcoming period. In the floating exchange 
rate regime the FX rate is neither a target, nor a p olicy tool. The only variable 
that the Central Bank sets as target is inflation and th e main policy tool to 
achieve this target is short-term interest rates. Therefor e, the Central Bank 
targeting a variable such as FX rate, growth or current account deficit is out of 
the question. 
 
34. The Central Bank shares with the public the general fra mework of the current 
exchange rate policy and FX buying auctions in the press r eleases it has 
issued each year since the start of 2002. As also stated in these press 
releases; 
i) In the current floating exchange rate regime, exchang e 
rates are determined by supply and demand conditions in   9the market and the Central Bank does not have any 
exchange rate target.  
ii) Since there is no exchange rate level to maintain in  
countries with floating exchange rate regimes, the level of 
foreign currency reserves is much less significant compared 
to countries with fixed or flexible exchange rate regimes.  
However, especially in emerging economies such as 
Turkey, a strong FX reserves position is significant in 
removing the unfavorable effects of potential internal and 
external shocks and boosting confidence in the country’s 
economy. In addition, taking into account the foreign d ebt 
payments of the Treasury and the need to gradually re duce 
the number of high-cost remittance accounts in the long-
term, which are peculiar to Turkey and make up a 
significant part of the liabilities side of the Central  Bank’s 
balance sheet, the Central Bank holds foreign exchange 
buying auctions to build up reserves at times where forei gn 
exchange supply constantly increases compared to foreign 
exchange demand.  
iii) The economic transformation process experienced after the 
2001 crisis has enabled significant achievements in 
macroeconomic stabilization and helped reduce the 
“dollarization” effect created by unstable macroeconomic 
policies and high inflation in the past. Despite some 
deviations from this main tendency due to exogenous 
shocks and changes in risk perceptions, decisive 
implementation of economic program has always enabled a  
return to the main tendency. This process, combined with 
favorable developments in the balance of payments, has 
supported the increase in foreign exchange supply in the 
economy.          
iv) In this framework, in order to minimize the impact on supply 
and demand conditions in the foreign exchange market, th e 
Central Bank, which follows a moderate reserve-raising 
policy, has conducted its FX buying via auctions, whose 
terms and conditions are announced with due notice, since 
1 April 2002. Moreover, the Bank has announced annual 
auction programs since 2005 and does not make any 
amendments to these programs, unless extraordinary 
differences are observed in foreign exchange liquidity.  
v) Meanwhile, as also emphasized in all its press releases, the 
Central Bank will continue to closely monitor the volati lity in 
exchange rates and may directly intervene in the markets i n 
the event of excessive volatility that might occur in either  
direction. These volatility interventions are not only ca rried 
out by considering past data with a mechanical rule, but  by 
evaluating all aspects of realized and potential volatil ities.                10 35. In the press release referred to as “The General Framew ork of Inflation 
Targeting Regime and Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy  for 2006” dated 5 
December 2005, the annual auction program for 2006 wa s announced in 
consistence with the aforementioned general framework. T he maximum daily 
amount that can be bought was determined as USD 60 mil lion, with USD 20 
million of auction amount and USD 40 million of opti onal selling amount (200 
% of the total amount sold), to be effective as of the 2 nd  of January 2006.  
36. However, in line with the decline in foreign exchange su pply due to global 
liquidity conditions, the depth of the foreign exchange  market was lost and 
volatilities were observed in exchange rates. Therefore, t he Bank decided to 
suspend daily FX buying auctions for a certain period of  time, starting from the 
16 th  of May 2006.  
37. Moreover, as a response to the excessive volatility in exchange  rates 
observed in 2006, the Central Bank directly intervened i n the market via one 
FX buying intervention and three FX selling interventi ons.  These interventions 
were as follows:  
i) Following the increase in foreign exchange sales due t o 
developments in international markets, the Central Bank 
decided to directly intervene in the market by buying a  total 
amount of USD 5.4 billion foreign currency on 15 Febr uary 
2006, in order to prevent actual and expected excessive 
volatilities.  
ii) On 13 June 2006 and 23 June 2006, the Central Ban k 
decided to directly intervene in the market by selling f oreign 
currency in order to prevent the excessive volatility 
observed in line with the liquidity shortage in the fo reign 
currency market due to global liquidity conditions. Tota l 
amounts sold were USD 0.5 billion and USD 0.8 billion , 
respectively.  
iii) In the Monetary Policy Committee meeting held o n the 25 th  
of June 2006 following the aforementioned interventio ns, it 
was stated that the liquidity shortage in the foreign currency 
market continued and once again underlined that an 
effective foreign currency market was a prerequisite for t he 
price stability target. Thus, in order to provide forei gn 
currency supply via its instruments and mechanisms, the 
Central Bank directly intervened in the market by sellin g an 
amount of USD 0.9 billion foreign currency on the 26 th  of 
June 2006. In addition to this intervention, two more FX 
selling auctions were held on the 26 th  and 27 th  of June 
2006, in which a total amount of USD 1 billion forei gn 
currency was sold.  
38. Following the measures taken by the Central Bank against  the volatility in 
financial markets in May and June 2006 and improved glob al liquidity 
conditions, the foreign exchange market has become relative ly stable. For this 
reason, the Central Bank has decided to resume the forei gn exchange buying 
auctions, which were suspended on the 16 th  of May 2006, as of the 10 th  of  11 November 2006.  Accordingly, the maximum daily amount to be purchased in  
the auctions has been set at USD 45 million, with USD 1 5 million for auction 
amount, and USD 30 million for optional selling amou nt (200 % of the total 
amount sold).      
39. As of 12 December 2006, the total amount of foreign cu rrency purchased via 
auctions and interventions is USD 9.4 billion, while the  total amount sold is 
USD 3.1 billion for the whole of 2006. The total am ounts of foreign currency 
purchased and sold by the Central Bank are shown year by  year in the table 
below:  
Table 2: The Central Bank’s Net Foreign Exchange Pu rchases and Sales  
(2002-2006; million USD)  
Year FX Buying 
Auctions FX Selling 
Auctions FX Buying 
Interventions  FX Selling 
Interventions  Total Net FX 
Buying 
2002 795 - 16 12 799 
2003 5.652 - 4.229 - 9.881 
2004 4.104 - 1.283 9 5.378 
2005 7.442 - 14.565 - 22.007 
2006* 3.961 1.000 5.441 2.105 6.297 
Total 21.954 1.000 25.534 2.126 44.362 
       * As of 12 December 2006   
 
40. Unless extraordinary differences are observed in foreign e xchange liquidity 
conditions, FX buying auctions will continue in 2007 in the framework of the 
aforementioned program. However, as was the case before,  the Central Bank 
may, with prior notice, suspend the auctions temporarily  for short or longer 
periods when the depth of the foreign exchange market i s lost due to 
exogenous shocks or unforeseen extraordinary developments, an d when the 
resulting excessive volatility and unhealthy price formatio n are observed in 
foreign exchange rates. On the other hand, the Central  Bank will continue to 
closely monitor the volatility in exchange rates also in 2 007 and will directly 
intervene in the market in the event of actual and pote ntial excessive 
volatilities. 
 
41. Banks will be able to borrow foreign exchange in terms o f USD and euro from 
the Central Bank within the predetermined limits with  a one-week maturity in 
the Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Market-Foreign Exchange  Deposit 
Market in the upcoming period too. Moreover, the purcha se/sale transactions 
of “foreign exchange against foreign exchange”, “ foreig n exchange against 
foreign banknotes” and “foreign banknotes against foreig n banknotes” 
conducted between the Central Bank and institutions auth orized to operate in 
the Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets will continue. 
42. In conclusion, as can be understood from the general fram ework and our 
exchange rate policy implementations described above, exchan ge rates are 
established by supply and demand conditions in the forei gn exchange markets 
under the implementation of the floating foreign exch ange regime. The key  12 determinants of foreign exchange supply and demand are the monetary and 
fiscal policies and the economic fundamentals determined b y the structural 
reform process and expectations. It should be borne in min d that in a floating 
exchange rate regime, economic agents operate in an envir onment of 
exchange rate risk. Nevertheless, as repeatedly emphasized b y the Central 
Bank, exchange rate risk is a manageable risk and economic ag ents should 
establish the mechanisms that will ensure the efficient ma nagement of this 
risk. 
LIQUIDITY MANAGEMENT 
 
43. Excess liquidity, which was created by the Central Bank’s pu rchases of 
government securities worth of YTL 14 billion from state -owned banks and 
banks transferred to the Savings Deposit Insurance Fund (SD IF) in order to 
meet their liquidity needs following the February 20 01 crisis, as well as the 
intensive foreign exchange purchases during the 2003-2005 period, persisted 
in 2006.  
44. The Central Bank, withdrew the excess liquidity in the m arket mainly via New 
Turkish Lira deposit operations in the Interbank Money M arket within the 
CBRT and Repo transactions in the Repo and Reverse Repo Market of the 
Istanbul Stock Exchange, on an overnight basis. Accordingly, overnight 
interest rates were constantly realized around the borr owing rate of the Central 
Bank. Hence, the borrowing rate of the Central Bank ha s continued to be an 
indicator for money markets.  
45. Based on the information currently available, the level  of the liquidity in the 
market in 2007 
i) The increase in base money,  
ii) Coupon and principal redemption by the Treasury t o the 
Central Bank, 
iii) Treasury’s foreign exchange debt payments financed b y its 
domestic currency borrowing 
will have a lowering effect, while 
i) The Central Bank’s net foreign exchange purchases, 
ii) Interest payments to be made by the Central Bank f or 
reserve requirements and for excess liquidity absorbing 
transactions,  
iii) The decline in Treasury cash accounts with the Centra l 
Bank will have an increasing effect on liquidity.  
46. Based on the assumption that the foreign exchange paymen ts of the Treasury 
would exceed the foreign exchange inflow, and by taking the Central Bank FX 
buying auction program into consideration, the excess liqu idity in the market is 
expected to continue within reasonable limits in 2007, e ven though temporary 
liquidity shortages may occur. However, as in previous year s, it is not possible 
to make a precise forecast regarding the net foreign excha nge payments of 
the Treasury, the amount of the Central Bank’s foreign  currency purchases  13 and the balance of Treasury cash accounts with the Central  Bank. Depending 
on the variations of these variables, the market liquidi ty may change 
significantly. 
47. As long as the excess liquidity in the market remains at re asonable levels, as 
foreseen in the main scenario, the Central Bank will con tinue to withdraw the 
excess liquidity in the market, on an overnight basis, via N ew Turkish Lira 
deposit operations in the Interbank Money Market within  the CBRT and Repo 
transactions in the Repo and Reverse Repo Market of Istanb ul Stock 
Exchange. Accordingly, overnight interest rates will contin ue to realize at the 
level of the borrowing rate of the Central Bank. Thus,  the overnight borrowing 
rate of the Central Bank will continue to be the bench mark interest rate with 
respect to monetary policy.    
48. In case of a permanent liquidity shortage in the market , the benchmark short-
term interest rate will be the average interest rate o f the repo auction, not the 
daily borrowing interest rate of the Central Bank. Th erefore, in case of liquidity 
shortage, the interest rate taken as a benchmark by the m arket would have 
become higher merely due to the decline in liquidity.  In order to avoid any 
negative impacts, the Central Bank could revise its interest  rates – provided 
that the inflation outlook is stable – so as to encounter  the pressure created by 
the liquidity shortage. However, such an interest rate cu t would only mean a 
technical arrangement stemming from the change in liqui dity conditions. 
Therefore, such a move should not be perceived as a looseni ng or tightening 
of monetary policy. 
49. Under the assumptions regarding liquidity stated above, the Central Bank’s 
2007 liquidity management strategy will be as follows:  
i) The Central Bank will continue to announce overnight  
borrowing and lending interest rates between 10:00-12 :00 
and 13:00-16:00 in the Interbank Money Market within the 
CBRT. In case of a liquidity shortage during the day, banks 
will be able to borrow at the Central Bank’s lending rate 
against collateral within their limits. In the event of  a fall in 
interest rates due to increasing liquidity, banks will be  able 
to lend New Turkish Lira to the Central Bank at the Ce ntral 
Bank’s borrowing rate. 
ii) The Central Bank will continue to provide the Late  Liquidity 
Window Facility in the Interbank Money Market within t he 
CBRT between 16:00-16:30 such that banks may borrow 
from or lend to the Central Bank against collateral wi thout 
any limit.   
 
 
iii) In case of a temporary or permanent liquidity sho rtage, the 
Central Bank will continue to carry out liquidity mana gement 
through one-week repo auctions. When there is liquidity  
shortage in the market, the Central Bank will announce the 
amount of repo auction for that day on Reuters’ CBTF page  14 at 10.00. While determining the amounts of the auctio n, the 
Central Bank - as long as no extraordinary fluctuations a re 
observed in the market - will endeavor to maintain the 
average auction interest rate;  
a. At maximum of 1 percentage point above the O/N 
borrowing rate of the Central Bank announced for 
the intra-day transactions and to reduce fluctuations 
in O/N interest rates, in cases where the liquidity 
shortage in the market is envisaged temporary and 
when the technical interest rate cut explained in 
paragraph 48 is not applied,  
b. At approximately the mid point of the O/N borrowi ng 
and lending rates of the Central Bank, in cases 
where the liquidity shortage in the market is 
envisaged permanent and the technical interest rate 
cut explained in paragraph 48 is applied. 
iv) The weekly repo auctions will be executed at 11:00 an d the 
results will be announced on Reuters’ CBTG page no late r 
than 11:30. The traditional auction method will be u sed in 
auctions; in other words, the successful bidders will be 
evaluated with their own interest rates. 
v) In case of unforeseen excessive liquidity shortage during 
the day, which would exert excessive pressure on money 
market interest rates, the CBRT may announce “Intra-day  
Repo Auctions” in addition to the regular ones. 
vi) The primary dealer banks will be able to conduct rep o 
transactions within the framework of open market 
operations, between 10.00–12.00 and 13.00–16.00 hour s.  
vii) In case of an excessive increase in the liquidity surplus or 
the emerge of extraordinary fluctuations in the market even 
at reasonable levels of excess liquidity, to enhance the 
effectiveness and flexibility of monetary policy and liqu idity 
management strategy, in addition to YTL deposit buyin g 
auctions with standard maturities, , – reverse repo auctio ns 
and Central Bank liquidity bills with maturity  up to  91 days 
may also be used actively., ,. As a matter of fact, techni cal 
procedures regarding the issue of the said bills were 
completed by the Central Bank, by “the Communiqué on 
Liquidity Bills” published in the Official Gazette, nu mber 
26310, dated 5th of October 2006.  
viii) Currently, depending on liquidity conditions, wh ether there 
will be standard one week or two weeks YTL deposit buyin g 
auctions will be held or not, if there will be an auct ion, the 
maximum amount to be drained through the auction is 
announced at 10.00 at Reuter’s CBTY page. In 2007, th e 
Central Bank may hold New Turkish Lira deposit buying 
auctions with standard maturities of 1, 2 and 4 weeks and   15 continue to announce the maturity and the maximum 
amount to be bought in the auction(s) on Reuters’ CBTY  
page. Starting from 2007 onwards, no announcement wil l 
be made on the said page on days when no auction is 
deemed necessary according to liquidity conditions. In case 
the issue of liquidity bills is deemed necessary, the meth od 
of issue of the said bills and other related informatio n will be 
announced to the public in advance by a press release.  
 
50. As always pointed out , the Central Bank deems the stabi lity and development 
of financial markets as  a supporting objective for the ef fective implementation 
of policies pertaining to price stability. As a matter o f fact, compatible with the 
floating exchange rate regime, the Central Bank has take n measures towards 
maintaining financial stability several times in the last  four years. Within this 
context, the Central Bank, the primary goal of which, e ntrusted to it by law, is 
to establish price stability, will continue its practices t o enhance the 
effectiveness of the monetary policy and liquidity manag ement, also in 2007. 
Accordingly, the Central Bank may change not only its li quidity management 
strategy, but also the borrowing and lending interest rate margins in cases of 
unpredictable changes in market conditions and according to  the new needs.  
 
51. Obviously, under the floating exchange rate regime, the  Central Bank is able 
to implement the YTL liquidity policy in a more flexi ble manner than it can 
under a fixed currency peg regime and can act more promp tly and flexibly to 
meet the YTL liquidity needs of the banking system. The  Central Bank can 
prevent excessive fluctuations in money market interest rates as long as they 
are consistent with the inflation target. However, it i s worth mentioning once 
more that the banking system should not slacken risk managem ent principles 
by simply relying on the more flexible and effective li quidity management of 
the Central Bank; to the contrary, it should use risk man agement principles 
effectively. 
  16  
 
 
 
 
    ANNEX: CALENDAR FOR 2007  
 
 
 
 
MPC Meeting Dates Inflation Report Financial Stabil ity Report 
16 January, Tuesday 29 January, Monday  
15 February, Thursday   
15 March, Thursday   
18 April, Wednesday 27 April, Friday  
14 May, Monday  31 May, Thursday 
14 June, Thursday   
12 July, Thursday 27 July, Friday  
14 August, Tuesday   
13 September, Thursday   
16 October, Tuesday  26 October, Friday  
14 November, Wednesday  30 November, Friday 
13 December, Thursday   
 
 