No: 2007- 32                 13 December 2007 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: December 13, 2007 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Baçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. brahim Turhan, Mehmet 
Yörükolu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) decided to lower the policy 
rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate from 16.25 to 15.75 percent, and lending 
rate from 20.75 to 20 percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate applied between 4:00 p.m. – 
5:00 p.m. from 12.25 to 11.75 percent, lending rate from 23.75 to 23 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity borrowing facilities provided for 
primary dealers via repo transactions from 19.75 to 19 percent. 
 
Third quarter GDP figures suggest a mainly supply-driven slowdown in economic 
activity. Private domestic demand displays a moderate recovery, yet the slowdown in 
government expenditures and in external demand contains domestic demand, as 
anticipated. Therefore, aggregate demand conditions continue to support disinflation. 
Accordingly, inflation is expected to decelerate despite the risks from food and energy 
prices. 
The Committee, judging the recent rise in inflation as temporary, maintained the 
policy stance presented in the October Inflation Report, and assessed that, under a 
measured and cautious rate cut cycle, the risks against attaining the inflation target in 
the medium run are balanced. Drought and energy related supply shocks not only 
increase inflation temporarily but also have short term adverse effects on the growth 
rate. The Committee underlined that the primary goal of the Central Bank is to achieve 
price stability, and noted that monetary policy remains restrictive even after the recent 
rate cuts. 
The timing and extent of further easing will depend on incoming information 
regarding global liquidity conditions, external demand, fiscal policy implementation and 
other factors affecting the medium term inflation outlook. Furthermore, potential second 
round effects of rising food and energy prices are closely monitored. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or information related to the inflation 
outlook will lead the Committee to reconsider its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
eight working days. 