     No: 29  
          26 October 2007  
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: October 16, 2007 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices increased by 1.03 percent in September , bringing year-on-
year inflation rate down to 7.12 percent. As foreseen in the summary of the 
previous Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) Mee ting, annual 
inflation continued to decelerate in September, follo wing a temporary rise in 
August.  
2. The volatility in the prices of fresh vegetables and f ruits impede the 
predictability of monthly inflation figures. Moreover,  processed food prices 
have displayed sharp increases over the last several months, d ue to 
temperatures above seasonal averages and drought condition s as well as the 
Ramadan effect. The course of food prices has increased the  importance of 
core indicators excluding the food group. Therefore, the  Committee noted that 
it would be useful to underscore the ongoing decelerati on in non-food 
inflation. 
3. Although energy prices continued to rise in Septembe r, at a much higher rate 
than the past few months due to soaring crude oil prices,  they still supported 
the disinflation process in the first nine months of the year. There may be 
some price increases in certain energy group items such as el ectricity and 
water in the upcoming period. The Committee assessed tha t the impact of 
these rate hikes on inflation would be temporary.  
4. The slowdown in services prices, which has become evident si nce July, was 
quite strong in September, bringing annual services infl ation down by 2.5 
percent in the past three months. Although the pace of disinflation process is 
particularly noteworthy in rents and restaurants-hotels group, the deceleration 
in services inflation is quite visible in other items as wel l. Since the beginning 
of the year, annual inflation rate has declined by 3 percentage points in rents 
and 5 percentage points in transportation services.  
5. The effect of monetary tightening on special CPI ag gregates has been quite 
visible. The slowdown in seasonally adjusted monthly incre ases in the widely 
cited core indicator, H-index (CPI excluding energy, unpr ocessed food, 
alcohol-tobacco and gold), confirms the downward trend i n inflation.  6. All in all, notwithstanding the risks related to ene rgy, food and administered 
prices, inflation is expected to decelerate owing to the lagged effects of strong 
monetary tightening. 
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
7. The Committee assesses that the second-quarter Gross Dome stic Product 
(GDP) data point to a moderate growth in domestic dem and and economic 
activity. In this period, private and public investments we re the main drivers of 
domestic demand growth, whereas the increase in private co nsumption 
demand was rather limited.  
8. Leading indicators for the third quarter point to an ongoing recovery in private 
investment expenditures. Domestic sales of commercial vehicles r ecorded 
high growth rates in both annual and quarterly terms.  While the machinery-
equipment production for the July-August period remain ed below the second 
quarter levels, electrical machinery production continued to increase in the 
same period, albeit at a slower pace. In the July-August  period, imports of 
capital goods, an indicator of investment demand, display ed a noticable rise 
compared to the second quarter. To sum up, initial read ings in the third 
quarter indicated a strong recovery in investment demand,  although that 
demand is mainly for imported goods. 
9. Consumption demand has started to recover in the thir d quarter. The 
composition of the aggregate demand has been shifting i n favor of domestic 
demand. According to seasonally adjusted figures, domestic sales of white 
goods, imports of consumer goods for the July-August perio d, and domestic 
sales of automobiles for the third quarter grew signifi cantly over the preceding 
quarter. Third-quarter average of the CNBC-e consumpti on index is above its 
second-quarter level, and consumer confidence indices confirm  the modest 
recovery in consumption demand.    
10. The Committee assesses that the aforementioned develo pments indicate a 
modest recovery in domestic demand, rather than an overhe ating in the 
economy, following the slowdown since the second half of 2006. Although 
quarterly growth rates of real consumer credit have been  somewhat rising 
recently, they still remain below the periods where do mestic demand was 
more robust. Likewise, domestic sales of automobiles, despit e the recent 
recovery in the third quarter, remains at modest levels.    
11. Industrial production figures in August and estimate s for September also 
confirm the moderate growth in domestic production. Ind ustrial production for 
the July-August period increased by 5 percent compared to  the same period last year, while seasonally adjusted figures indicate a sl ight increase over the 
preceding quarter. Despite the recent recovery, furnitur e manufacturing, a 
sub-sector believed to reflect consumer demand, is still bel ow the level it 
reached during the first half of 2006, when the domest ic demand was strong. 
12. While  growth in exports has maintained its strong pace, the rat e of increase in 
imports has surpassed that of exports in the June-August per iod due to the 
recovery in domestic demand and the appreciation of the Turkish lira. 
Therefore, it is projected that the contribution of ne t exports to GDP growth in 
the second half of the year will be negative.  
13. To sum up, readings on recent economic activity are in  line with the outlook 
presented in the July Inflation Report. While private consumption and 
investment demand exhibits signs of recovery, external deman d moderates 
and aggregate demand conditions continue to support the  disinflation 
process. This trend is likely to continue in the upcoming period as well.  
14. The upward trend in crude oil prices persisted in th e recent period. In 
addition, other commodity prices also continued to be on  the rise. Prices of 
agricultural products used as main inputs for processed food , such as wheat 
and corn, continue to rise. However, the strong domestic cu rrency partially 
offsets the rise in crude oil and other commodity prices a nd curbs input costs. 
15. Lagged effects of monetary tightening since the secon d half of 2006 seems to 
have curtailed the unit labor costs in the overall economy , primarily in the 
services sector. Downward trend in unit labor costs in the m anufacturing 
industry confirms this view. Although no wage data for t he services sector is 
available, a similar conclusion might well be drawn for this sector in view of 
the slowdown in the growth rate of employment and pr ices. 
 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
16. The Committee assessed that the September rate cut d ecision led to a 
significant fall in both the medium and long-term int erest rates, reducing the 
downward risks on medium term inflation posed by global  economic 
developments. 
17. In light of these developments, the Committee decid ed to continue the 
measured rate cuts. The Committee underlines that the cu rrent level of the 
short-term interest rates remains restrictive even after th e recent policy rate 
cuts. The Committee assesses that, under the current policy stance 
envisaging a measured and cautious rate cut cycle, the risks o n attaining the 
inflation target in the medium term are balanced. 18. Considering the downward trend in interest rates, the Committee decided to 
narrow the gap between borrowing and lending rates i n order to limit the 
extent of potential upside fluctuations in overnight int erest rates. In this 
regard, borrowing rates are reduced by 50 basis points, while lending rates 
are cut by 75 basis points. It should be noted, however, that main policy 
instrument of the Central Bank is the overnight borrowi ng rates, and thus the 
additional cut in lending rates is merely a technical ad justment. 
19. The Committee stated that the timing and extent o f further easing would 
depend on the incoming information regarding global liquidity conditions, 
external demand, public expenditures and other determin ants of the medium 
term inflation outlook. In other words, the future mo netary policy decisions will 
be data dependent. Main risks to the inflation and mon etary policy outlook 
can be summarized as follows: 
20. The Committee closely monitors the developments in i nternational liquidity 
conditions and credit markets.  As of today, a sharp slowdo wn on global 
economic growth is not perceived as the most likely scenario,  leading to 
continued capital flows to emerging markets. However, tha t the risks in the 
financial markets have not yet been adequately priced ne cessitates caution. 
The CBT, in case of a heightened risk aversion and a decli ne in risk appetite 
towards emerging financial markets, will aim at limitin g the effects of possible 
market fluctuations on inflation outlook by pursuing an active liquidity 
management strategy, as well as by utilizing other pol icy instruments if 
needed. 
21. Recent volatility in credit markets has partially off set the upside risks to the 
aggregate demand mentioned in the July Inflation Rep ort. However, there are 
some remaining risks to the demand outlook. On one side, the extent to which 
the recent decline in longer-term rates will stimulate the domestic demand is 
yet to be observed. On the other side, a sharper-than-e nvisaged slowdown in 
global growth will ease both the external demand and,  through the tighter 
credit conditions, the domestic demand. Financing conditio ns and credit 
developments will continue to be closely monitored in th e face of these upside 
and downside risks. If credit conditions turn out to be mo re favorable than 
expected and the domestic demand accelerates, this may lead  to a more 
cautious policy stance than implied by the baseline scenari o, as well as the 
use of policy tools other than short term interest rates,  such as required 
reserves and alike. Likewise, materialization of downside risks would lead to a 
downward adjustment in the policy stance. 
22. As of the meeting date, medium term outlook is base d on the assumption that 
government expenditure targets will be met in 2008 and  incomes policy will 
be set in line with inflation targets. On the other h and, the fact that efforts to readjust the primary budget balance are more focused on  increases in 
indirect taxes as opposed to expenditure cuts poses a risk to t he predictability 
of inflation. 
23. The sustained rise in food prices is considered as an im portant risk to the 
inflation outlook. Our medium term projection envisages a gradual correction 
in which food inflation converges to headline inflation  in the medium term. 
However, low crop yields in 2007 and recent global tren ds have increased 
upside risks to the food inflation. On the other hand, past cumulative hikes 
have created a high base in food prices, increasing the po ssibility of a 
downward adjustment. Potential volatility in food pri ces continue to pose risks 
to the inflation outlook on both sides, since food prices constitute a large 
fraction of the CPI index. The Committee will not rea ct to the developments in 
food prices as long as the second round effects are containe d. 
24. There are some uncertainties over the medium term i mpact of the recent 
developments in energy prices. Owing to cumulative increase s in international 
oil and natural gas prices, recently the need to make a sizeable adjustment in 
electricity prices has been on the agenda. The price of w ater, classified as an 
energy item in the CPI, may also display a significant rise in the last quarter of 
2007, although the rate of increase may differ across re gions. Moreover, 
international crude oil prices have continued its upward course.  Medium term 
impact of the rise in energy prices on inflation will b e limited, as long as the 
inflation expectations and the price setting behavior rem ains intact. However, 
since the energy price is an important factor of producti on, it should also be 
added that recent developments in energy prices have compe lled the CBT to 
be relatively more cautious. On the other hand, switchin g to a cost-based 
automatic pricing mechanism in electricity would reduce th e risks on shortage 
of supply as well as on price stability.  
25. Turkey has taken significant steps towards price stabilit y in recent years. 
However, it is not yet possible to define the current sta te as price stability. 
The CBT will continue to exercise its policy instruments to  attain price stability 
and thus to improve welfare of the society in the mediu m term. During this 
process, it is particularly important not to sacrifice long -term permanent gains 
in favor of temporary benefits. 
26. The support of fiscal policy and structural reforms ar e also critical in achieving 
price stability. In this respect, the European Union accessi on process and the 
implementation of structural reforms envisaged in the eco nomic program 
remain to be of concern. Particularly, advances in structur al reforms that 
would enhance the quality of fiscal discipline are monit ored closely with 
regard to their implications on macroeconomic and price st ability. 
 