No: 2007 - 15           
 
July 6, 2007  
 
 
PRESS RELEASE ON  THE IMPLEMENTATION INSTRUCTIONS FOR  THE 
INTERBANK MONEY MARKET, BANKS’ BORROWING LIMITS IN THE 
INTERBANK MONEY MARKET AND LIQUIDITY FACILITIES OFF ERED TO 
PRIMARY DEALER BANKS  
 
1. “Implementation Instructions for the Interbank Money  Market” booklet dated 
February 2000 has been updated in order to include th e current 
implementation instructions that were sent to banks on va rious dates following 
its issue date and the changes made to the current implem entations. The 
changes in the implementation instructions will become ef fective as of July 9, 
2007. The fundamental changes in the implementation i nstructions for the 
Interbank Money Market (IMM) operations are as follows:  
i) In order to support banks’ liquidity management and  enhance the 
effectiveness and flexibility of the payment system, Lat e Liquidity 
Window (LON) operations that are conducted between 4 p .m.– 4:30 
p.m. currently will be carried out between 4 p.m.– 5 p.m. on business 
days and between 4 p.m. – 5:15 p.m. on the last busine ss day of the 
reserve maintenance period..  
ii) The minimum transaction limit for YTL deposit and LON transactions 
has been increased to YTL 100.000 and multiples from YT L 50.000 and 
multiples; while the minimum transaction limit for Int ra-Day Liquidity 
Facility (IDLF) transactions has been decreased to YTL 100 .000 and 
multiples from YTL 250.000 and multiples.  
iii) Gold deposits, which are among the collateral type s but not actively 
used, will no longer be accepted as collateral due to th e difficulties in 
implementation. 
iv) Central Bank Liquidity Bills will be accepted as colla teral too.  
v) In order to facilitate the collateral management o f banks, government 
securities shall be accepted as collateral until one business day prior to 
their maturity date, instead of three working days. 2.  To enhance the Central Bank’s flexibility and effi ciency of liquidity 
management and to encourage widespread utilization of  the liquidity facilities 
of the Bank by the banking system, the total borrowing limit allocated to banks 
in the IMM has been increased. However, the liquidity facility offered to 
primary dealer banks within the framework of open marke t operations has 
been reduced. Considering the increase in the asset growt h of the banking 
system between the years 2003 - 2006, the IMM total bo rrowing limit of the 
banking system, which was latest set on July 22, 2004, has a lmost been 
doubled to be effective as of July 9, 2007. The limit allocated to the banks is 
determined according to the share of their assets in the aggregate banking 
system. On the other hand, the unlimited borrowing fa cility provided to banks 
against adequate collateral from the LON quota announ ced at O/N maturity in 
line with the Central Bank’s lender of the last resort function will continue.  
3. As indicated in the press release dated September 03,  2002, the CBRT 
provides liquidity facility for the primary dealer ba nks in order to support the 
primary dealership system. Considering the increase of th e borrowing limit 
provided for the banking system in the IMM with the ai m of securing a wider 
utilization of the CBRT liquidity facilities for the banking system, the liquidity 
facility provided to primary dealer banks is revised as f ollows to be effective 
from the beginning of the new primary dealership ter m (September 03, 2007): 
i) The total amount of liquidity facility provided f or the primary 
dealer banks has been decreased to 7 percent from 10 perce nt of 
the outstanding Turkish lira denominated Treasury securit ies 
purchased from Treasury auctions (including the net amoun t of 
the  Turkish lira denominated securities purchased from auctions,  
public offerings, TAP sales, noncompetitive sales and switch ing 
auctions and excluding FX indexed securities). Primary de aler 
banks will continue to use the liquidity  facility in th e form of O/N 
or one-week repo transactions at any time, between10 a. m – 4 
p.m, as currently in practice.  
ii) The amount of government securities, which a primar y dealer 
bank is authorized to sell, has been reduced from 50 per cent to 
40 percent of its total liquidity facility. In using go vernment 
securities selling facility the following principles shall apply:  a) The banks in need of liquidity shall inform the CBR T about their 
demands for selling benchmark government securities. 
b) The CBRT shall contact with other primary dealer ba nks and 
may preferably announce auctions for the government secu rity 
or securities that it deems appropriate. CBRT, if necessar y, 
may use the quotation method. 
c) In this framework, the maximum daily amount of gove rnment 
securities that the CBRT can buy shall not exceed 20 perce nt 
of the total selling facility.  
d) While the repo facility for primary dealer banks is automatically 
available, the CBRT might disregard primary dealer b anks’ 
demands for selling government securities, if there is en ough 
liquidity in the government securities secondary market a nd/or 
there is no liquidity shortage in the market.  
e) When a bank uses government securities selling facility,  the 
total liquidity and government security selling facilit y shall be 
reduced as much as the amount of government securities sold .  
 
 