No: 2007-13

14 June 2007

DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
Meeting Date: June 14, 2007

Committee Members
Durmu Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba çı, Burhan Göklemez, M. brahim Turhan, Mehmet
Yörüko lu.

The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) decided to keep short-term
interest rates (policy rates) unchanged as follows:
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 17.50 percent, and lending rate at 22.50
percent,
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate applied between 4:00 p.m. – 4:30
p.m. at 13.50 percent, lending rate at 25.50 percent,
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity borrowing facilities provided for
primary dealers via repo transactions at 21.50 percent.
Recent data on economic activity is broadly consistent with the outlook presented in
the April Inflation Report. While the slowdown in private demand becomes more
pronounced, foreign demand remains strong. Aggregate demand conditions increasingly
support disinflation. Against this background, inflation is expected to maintain its downward
trend. However, the Committee decided to keep the policy rates unchanged against the
risks such as the gap between inflation expectations and targets, the backward looking
pricing behavior, the remaining uncertainties –notwithstanding recent favorable
developments– over services price inflation, rising oil prices, and prevailing uncertainties.
The lagged effects of monetary tightening exercised since June 2006 are quite
noticeable. Besides, the potential impacts of the progress in the structural reform agenda
and the developments in incomes policy as well as public sector non-interest expenditures
on inflation and inflation expectations are carefully evaluated. Within this framework, the
Committee assesses that meeting the medium term inflation targets requires the
maintenance of the tight policy stance.
It should be emphasized that any new data or information related to the inflation
outlook will lead the Committee to reconsider its stance.
A brief summary of the assessments of the Committee will be released within eight
working days.

