No: 2007-22 
24 August 2007  
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: August 14, 2007 
 
    Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices fell by 0.73 percent in July, bringin g annual inflation rate 
down to 6.90 percent. The cumulative decline in annual inflation over the past 
four months reached 4 percentage points. 
2. Annual inflation in both the processed and unprocessed  food groups 
decreased in July. Despite the rise in annual inflation in vegetable prices in 
July, annual inflation in the unprocessed food group de clined to 8.92 percent, 
down by 4.3 percentage points from the previous month, thanks to continued 
correction in fruit prices. Meanwhile, annual inflation  in processed food prices 
fell by 0.53 percentage points due to primarily last y ear’s base effect. In the 
second half of 2006, processed food prices had surged signif icantly because 
of the pass-through from depreciation in the local curre ncy (YTL) and owing to 
price movements mostly in the bread and cereal products gr oup. 
3. Price developments in the energy group supported the  disinflation process in 
July. Despite the high level of crude oil prices in inter national markets, 
domestic fuel prices displayed a decline on the back of stro ng YTL. In addition, 
the favorable trend in the prices of utilities and othe r energy items for housing 
group continued. 
4. Consumer durables prices, which displayed a downward t rend in April-June 
period, continued this favorable course in July as well an d annual inflation in 
this group came down to minus 2.15 percent. Another not eworthy 
development in July was the downturn in the annual inf lation of clothing and 
footwear prices, after a period of successive price increases i n the first half of 
2007.  
5. The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) not ed the favorable 
developments in services inflation since early 2007. The slo wdown in annual 
services inflation became more pronounced in July. The mon thly inflation rates 
have declined in all sub-groups (rent, restaurants-hotels,  transportation and all 
other services) compared to the same month of the previous year. Annual 
services inflation fell by 2 percentage points in the fir st seven months of 2007, 
the restaurants-hotels group contributed most to this decl ine. The lowest 
annual inflation among the main service expenditure gro ups was observed in communication services with 3.50 percent. The impact of the  rate cut in local 
calls on communication services prices in late July will be ob served largely in 
August. 
6. Notwithstanding the risks related to energy and food  prices, inflation continues 
to decelerate owing to the lagged effects of the strong  monetary tightening. 
Annual inflation in all core measures declined in July. This was mainly driven 
by the favorable price developments for durable goods an d services. The 
downward trend in the annual rate of increase of the mostly cited core 
indicator-H (CPI excluding food, energy, alcohol-tobacco and gold) became 
more evident in July. The seasonally adjusted monthly in flation measured by 
using this index continued to slow down.  
7. On the other hand, the Committee emphasized that the decline in 
unprocessed food prices observed last year in August may not  recur this year, 
and consequently noted that food prices and the annual inflation rate might 
display a temporary rise in August.  
Factors Affecting Inflation 
8. The Committee assessed that the recent data on economi c activity and 
inflation are consistent with the outlook presented in t he July Inflation Report. 
While private sector investment and consumption demand exhi bit signs of 
recovery, external demand is moderating and aggregate d emand conditions 
continue to support the disinflation process. 
9. Leading indicators for the second quarter of the yea r suggest that private 
consumption expenditures displayed a trend similar to the  one in the first 
quarter. The slowdown in domestic sales of white goods ob served since the 
third quarter of last year continued in the second quar ter of 2007 as well. 
Similarly, domestic sales of automobiles and imports of co nsumer goods 
slowed down during this period. Moreover, the pace of r eal growth in 
consumer loans was moderate compared to the first half of  2006. Hence, 
private consumption spending, in seasonally adjusted terms,  is expected to 
increase moderately in the second quarter of the year co mpared to the first 
quarter. On the other hand, June and July data on dom estic sales of 
automobiles, various consumption indices and domestic sales of  commercial 
vehicles point to a recovery in private investment and consum ption demand, 
starting from the third quarter of the year. 
10. Investment spending displayed a moderate growth tre nd. While imports of 
capital goods and production of electrical machinery incre ased in the second 
quarter of the year, machinery-equipment production a nd sales of light and 
heavy commercial vehicles decreased in seasonally adjusted ter ms compared 
to the first quarter. Meanwhile, the fall in constructi on permits in the first quarter compared to the same period of the previous yea r signals a relative 
slowdown in construction sector. However, the construction in vestments may 
continue to display high growth rates throughout the y ear, since current 
construction investments are closely related to past constructi on permits. 
11. In the first half of 2007, non-interest budget exp enditures increased noticeably 
by 25.7 percent compared to the same period of 2006. T his development 
indicates that public expenditures in recent months may ha ve restrained the 
disinflation process. Based on the projected end-year bud get targets, non-
interest public expenditures are expected to slow down sign ificantly in the 
second half of the year. Thus, it is likely that the stim ulus from the public 
expenditures to the aggregate demand may cease in the se cond half of 2007. 
It is of critical importance for the continuity of disinf lation process that potential 
measures that may be taken to achieve the program-define d non-interest 
budget targets would be implemented by cutting expendi tures rather than tax 
adjustments and that incomes policy for 2008 is conducted i n harmony with 
the medium-term inflation targets. 
12. External demand maintained its strong course in the second quarter of the 
year. In this period, exports increased by 13.2 percent i n annual terms. 
According to the data announced by the Turkish Exporters A ssembly, the 
strong performance of exports continued in July as well. T he robust course of 
external demand and the competitive advantage brought b y productivity gains 
are expected to support export growth in the near futur e. However, it is 
expected that the strong base effect that will be effecti ve from September 
onwards will restrain annual growth rate of exports.  
13. The strong performance of exports has supported indust rial production. 
Although year-over-year industrial production increased only modestly in June 
due to the high base in the same period of 2006, season ally adjusted data 
point to a moderate growth in the second quarter of t he year compared to the 
previous quarter.  
Monetary Policy and Risks  
14. Domestic demand has significantly slowed down after t he monetary tightening 
in 2006. The slowdown in domestic demand is affecting in flation with a lag. 
This effect is particularly noticeable in services prices. Alt hough domestic 
demand may partly recover in the second half of the yea r, aggregate demand 
conditions are expected to support the disinflation process —thanks to 
declining contribution of net exports and the government  spending. Therefore,  
the underlying disinflation is expected to continue in t he upcoming period. 
However, significant risks remain to the inflation outloo k on both sides: 15. Volatile food prices lead to unpredictable movement s in headline inflation. 
Moreover, bad crop of wheat poses risks on the consumer price s through the 
prices of bread and grain products. The Central Bank doe s not react to the 
temporary movements in unprocessed food prices, however close ly monitors 
these developments since they can effect inflation expectati ons. It should  also 
be noted that the risks posed by the food prices are not one sided, as the base 
effects may result in favorable surprises in the forthcomin g period. 
16. The stickiness in inflation expectations is considered as a n important risk to 
the inflation outlook. Although the headline inflati on has been easing down 
significantly in the past four months, inflation expectat ions of financial market 
participants have not shown any improvement. Corporate se ctor expectations 
are still significantly above the medium term targets de spite the downward 
trend in the past couple of months. The prevailing gap between medium term 
inflation expectations and the targets poses uncertainties on the wage setting 
behavior—especially in the public sector—and hence the service prices, 
pointing to the risk of a slower-than-envisaged pace of d isinflation.  
Materialization of such a risk could result in a more caut ious policy than stated 
in the July Inflation Report. 
17. The Committee closely monitors the developments in t he international liquidity 
conditions and the credit markets. Recent market volatility  has the potential to 
effect inflation through several distinct channels: In the  short term the 
depreciation in domestic currency and the subsequent pass-t hrough may have 
an inflationary impact, although this impact would par tly be offset by the 
decline in oil and other commodity prices driven by risin g concerns over the 
outlook for global growth. On the other hand, the re cent developments in the 
international liquidity conditions and the credit marke ts will contain the 
downward trend in the bank lending rates, and also curb  the banks’ appetite 
for extending credit. Accordingly, likelihood of the mat erialization of the risk 
that “domestic demand conditions may turn less supportive f or the disinflation 
process, once the prevailing uncertainties fade out and th e long-term interest 
rates continue to decline during the second half of the year”, as quoted in the 
last months  Summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting, has been 
reduced. 
18. In this respect, the Committee, as of the meeting d ate, maintained the policy 
stance outlined in the Inflation Report, and thus envisi oned a measured easing 
starting from the last quarter of 2007. However, the C ommitte added that the 
exact timing and the extent of the easing may vary depen ding on the incoming 
information regarding global liquidity conditions, ext ernal demand, public 
expenditures and other determinants of medium term inf lation outlook. 19. The developments in the global markets and their re flections on the domestic 
markets are closely monitored. The Central Bank will uti lize the available tools 
to mitigate the adverse impact of developments in the gl obal markets on the 
inflation outlook. Within this framework, the Committe e, during the meeting, 
also assessed liquidity developments in the domestic money m arket, and 
evaluated liquidity management strategies. The YTL liq uidity is expected to be 
at sufficient levels in the forthcoming period. However, barring extraordinary 
market fluctuations, the Central Bank, by using existing o pen market operation 
tools, may regulate the liquidity levels on both sides w hen needed, to ensure 
that the overnight rates in the money market stay close t o the Central Bank 
borrowing rates. 
20. Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not sufficien t for securing the 
resilience of the economy to global shocks. The role of fi scal policy and 
structural reforms are also critical in this process. In this respect, the European 
Union accession process and the implementation of the struct ural reforms 
envisaged in the economic program remain to be importan t for long-term 
stability. Particularly, advances in structural reforms tha t would enhance the 
quality of fiscal discipline are monitored closely with r egard to their effects on 
both macroeconomic and price stability. 