No: 2007-25  
        19 September 2007  
 
  SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: September 13, 2007 
 
 Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices rose by 0.02 percent in August, bringi ng annual inflation to 
7.39 percent. As predicted in the summary of the previou s Monetary Policy 
Committee (the Committee) meeting, the rise in annua l inflation rate was due 
to price increases in the unprocessed food group. Favorable  developments in 
the prices of other goods and services suggest that this recen t increase in 
annual inflation rate would be temporary. 
2. Volatility in the unprocessed food prices, which has be en experienced since 
early 2007, also continued in August. According to seasona lly adjusted 
figures, there was a notable rise in the prices of the u nprocessed food group 
last month, due to price hikes primarily in fresh vegetab les and also to a 
lesser extent in unprocessed food products other than fresh vegetables and 
fruits. Annual inflation rate in the processed food gro up, on the other hand, fell 
in August thanks to last year’s base effect. 
3. Favorable developments in the prices of the energy sect or have continued in 
August. Prices of energy items for housing group displaye d a limited increase, 
while domestic fuel prices dropped following the decline  in crude oil prices in 
international markets. Overall, price developments in the  energy group, with a 
2.56 percent year-to-date inflation rate, have support ed the disinflation 
process. 
4. Strong monetary tightening continues to be effective  on prices of consumer 
durables. In line with the slowdown in demand, the pr ices of consumer 
durables group have declined in the last five months and this trend has 
spread across the group. As of August, the annual inflati on rate in this group 
came down to – 2.80 percent. 
5. The Committee noted that the recent developments in  services inflation have 
been more favorable than expected. The downward trend that has been 
observed in the services inflation since the beginning of 2 007 has became 
more significant in August. Annual inflation in all ser vices items has come 
down, with rents being the most remarkable. Following the benign course of 
fuel prices, annual services inflation in the transportati on group declined in August. Recent rate cuts in local phone calls affected tele communication 
group, as expected. 
6. The impact of monetary tightening on disinflation was also evident in core CPI 
measures. The annual rate of increase in the widely cite d core indicator-H 
(CPI excluding food, energy, alcohol-tobacco and gold), which has been 
declining since April, continued to fall in August. Seaso nally adjusted monthly 
changes in this index have also indicated a downward trend  in inflation. 
7. In light of these assessments the Committee concluded th at the improvement 
in services inflation was beyond expectations, while develop ments in other 
price categories were in line with the outlook presented  in the July Inflation 
Report. 
 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
8. Gross Domestic Product increased by 3.9 percent in the se cond quarter of 
2007 compared to the same quarter of the previous year.  In that period the 
contribution of net external demand decreased but remai ned positive, 
whereas the contribution of domestic demand increased mod erately. Of the 
domestic demand components, private consumption expenditure s declined in 
annual terms as projected in the July Inflation Report.  This can be attributed 
to the lagged effects of monetary tightening on the d emand for consumer 
durables. Meanwhile, investment expenditures accelerated i n the same 
period and became the main determinant of the growth  in domestic demand. 
9. The analysis of seasonally adjusted expenditures showed that the key 
developments in the second quarter were the increases in p ublic investment 
expenditures and private sector machinery-equipment investm ents. The 
contribution of public expenditures to the GDP was almost  half of the overall 
growth rate. As stipulated in the Summary of the Mone tary Policy Committee 
Meeting in August, private consumption demand followed a trend similar to 
the one observed in the first quarter and increased mode stly compared to the 
previous quarter. Against this background, the moderate g rowth in the 
domestic demand has continued. 
10. Leading indicators for the third quarter point to  a recovery in private 
consumption demand. According to seasonally adjusted figur es, domestic 
sales of automobiles in the July-August period, domestic sa les of white 
goods, and imports of consumer goods in July increased signi ficantly 
compared to the previous quarter. The Committee noted that despite recent 
upsurge, sales figures remained well below the levels seen  in the first half of 
2006. On the other hand, the July-August average of th e CNBC-e consumption index was well above its second-quarter level, w hile consumer 
confidence indices confirmed the recovery in private consumpt ion demand. 
The pace of consumer loans in recent months also revealed a  similar outlook. 
11. The recovery in investment demand, which has started i n the second quarter, 
has continued in the third quarter as well. Imports of capital goods picked up 
in July and commercial vehicle sales in the July-August peri od increased 
noticeably compared to the same period last year. Season ally adjusted 
figures were also significantly above their second quarter  levels. Other 
indicators for investment demand, such as imports of machine ry-equipment 
and electrical machinery, also indicated an upward trend  in the third quarter. 
All in all, initial readings in the third quarter po inted out acceleration in 
investment demand, particularly in investment good impor ts. 
12. There was a noticeable increase in public expenditure s in the second quarter, 
which contributed as many as 1.8 percentage points—almost h alf of the total 
value added—to annual GDP growth and slowed down the d isinflation 
process. While forming the inflation outlook, the Commi ttee projected that, in 
line with budget targets for 2007, there would be a significant decline in the 
contribution of public expenditures to growth in the seco nd half of the year, 
and that would restrain the growth in total domestic d emand. 
13. Despite the strong course of external demand, the ra te of increase in imports 
exceeded the growth rate of exports in June and July, fol lowing the recovery 
in domestic demand. While the robust course of exports is e xpected to 
continue for the rest of the year, there may be a slow  down in annual growth 
rates due to loss of working days caused by religious holid ays and the last 
year’s high base effect. As the growth of imports outpace  that of exports, net 
exports are expected to have a negative effect on GDP grow th in the second 
half of the year. 
14.  Since mid-2006 strong monetary tightening has rest rained the growth rate in 
employment, particularly in services sector. The downward trend in non-
agricultural unemployment rate has ceased in recent peri ods, easing the 
pressure on wages. It is believed that this outlook will b e maintained provided 
that the incomes policy is conducted in harmony with the inflation target. 
Meanwhile, ongoing productivity gains in the manufactur ing industry is 
another factor that restrains unit labor costs.  
15. In sum, it is projected that the recovery in private investment and 
consumption demand will continue without a significant a cceleration, the 
contribution of external demand and public expenditures to growth will 
decrease and thus, aggregate demand and capacity conditio ns will continue 
to support the disinflation process.  
  Monetary Policy and Risks 
16. Since the impact of monetary policy on economic activi ty and inflation is 
observed with a lag, the Committee takes the monetary p olicy decisions on a 
medium term perspective. In this respect, it is particularl y important to identify 
the short term temporary movements from medium term tr ends. Recent 
readings reveal important information on the medium t erm inflation trends: 
17. Although the headline CPI inflation was up in Au gust, several sub-items of the 
index indicated significant favorable developments. The de celeration in 
services inflation is promising for the medium term infla tion trend. Moreover, 
seasonally adjusted figures of the core indices suggest that  the underlying 
inflation is moving towards the medium term targets. 
18. Recently announced GDP figures confirmed that the d omestic demand has 
continued to slow down in the second quarter of 2007, o n the back of the last 
years’ monetary tightening. Although private domestic d emand is expected to 
pick up in the second half of the year, disinflationary impacts of the significant 
slowdown observed in the past four quarters is expected to last for a while. In 
this respect, inflation is expected to further decelerate owing to the lagged 
effects of strong monetary tightening, notwithstanding the risks related to 
energy and food prices. 
19. The developments in international liquidity condit ions and credit markets are 
closely monitored. The Committee reemphasizes that these  developments 
should be evaluated with a medium term perspective. Furt her deepening of 
the international credit and money market concerns is like ly to affect the 
Turkish economy as well as other countries. Such a developme nt would lead 
to a tightening in credit conditions and thus support th e disinflation process in 
the medium term through the demand channel. In fact, recently the banks 
have been less willing to extend credits and the downward  trend in consumer 
loan rates has subsided. Besides its impact on domestic deman d, the 
Committee members have highlighted that recent developm ents in global 
credit markets have raised the concerns of a slowdown in glo bal economic 
activity, increasing the downside risks on external demand. 
20. Accordingly, recent developments on inflation as well  as domestic and global 
growth prospects imply an improved outlook for medium te rm inflation. 
Moreover, the Committee assesses that global developments a re likely to 
restrain both the domestic and external demand, increasin g the downward 
risks on achieving the 4 percent target in the medium ter m. As explained 
through the main policy documents on the general frame work of the inflation 
targeting regime, the Central Bank will be equally r esponsive to the upside and downside risks to attaining the target. Observing the  higher downside 
risks on medium term inflation implied by recent develop ments and referring 
to the conditional statement stipulated in the July Inf lation Report, the 
Committee decided that current conditions call for initi ating the measured rate 
cuts mentioned in the Inflation Report, and lowered t he policy rates by 25 
basis points. The Committee underlines that the current monetary policy 
stance continues to be restrictive. 
21. Besides the developments in global markets, other imp ortant risks to the 
inflation outlook can be described as follows: 
22. Significant hikes in public expenditures were the mai n factor restraining the 
disinflation process in the first half of the year. Adhe ring to the government’s 
budget projections, the Committee’s medium term inflat ion outlook rests on 
the assumption of a significant slowdown in public expendi tures during the 
second half of the year. Developments on the opposite di rection would pose 
risks to the aggregate demand, and therefore to the me dium term inflation 
outlook. The Committee closely monitors the developments in public 
spending. 
23. Food inflation continues to be a risk to the inflat ion outlook. Not only the 
volatile vegetable and fruit prices but also the adverse d evelopments in grain 
products owing to low crop yields driven by drought conditions are affecting 
the food prices. The projections on the harvest of grain products for 2007 
suggest that these developments may persist for a while. S ustained increases 
in international soft commodity prices, especially for wh eat and corn, add to 
the risks on food prices. The Committee members think that  monetary policy 
should not react to the volatility in food prices so long  as the second round 
effects are contained. 
24. Oil prices have continued to rise recently. Although strong domestic currency 
limits the impact of oil prices on domestic prices, past cumu lative increases in 
oil prices require caution for second round effects. Especia lly, uncertainty 
pertaining to the electricity prices are considered as a m ajor risk factor for the 
medium term outlook. 
25. Inflation expectations remain sticky. Despite the signi ficant fall in inflation in 
line with the Committee’s projections, medium term expe ctations have not 
shown any improvement. Although survey based expectations a re among the 
main indicators monitored by the Central Bank, the Com mittee observes that 
their information content can vary in time. In particul ar, the Committee 
members perceive the existing stickiness in expectations as more of a 
structural phenomenon arising from transition from high  to low inflation 
episode. Therefore, the Committee predicts that inflat ion expectations would 
eventually adjust to lower levels, as the inflation furt her decelerates in the medium term.  At the same time, the Committee believe s that Central Bank 
can have an active role in realigning public’s inflation expectations by putting 
more emphasis on its own institutional forecast. 
26. These risks not only require the monetary easing pro cess to be cautious and 
measured, but also increase the degree of data dependen cy of the fortcoming 
policy decisions. The exact timing and extent of further e asing may vary with 
the incoming information on global liquidity conditio ns, external demand, 
public expenditures and other determinants of medium te rm inflation outlook.   
27. Should the risk perceptions deteriorate significantly  in the forthcoming period, 
the Central Bank may resort to an active liquidity mana gement strategy to 
contain the short-term effects of a possible volatility in  the financial markets. 
28. Under current conditions, the role of fiscal policy a nd structural reforms are 
critical for improving the resilience of the economy agai nst global shocks. In 
this respect, the European Union accession process and the im plementation 
of the structural reforms envisaged in the economic progra m remain to be 
important for long-term stability. Advances in structural  reforms that would 
enhance the quality of fiscal discipline are monitored cl osely with a special 
emphasis on macroeconomic and price stability. 