No: 2008-01  
17 January 2008  
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: January 17, 2008 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, Mehmet 
Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) decided  to lower the policy 
rates  as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate from 15.75 to 15.50 percent , and lending 
rate from 20 to 19.50 percent , 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing ra te applied between 4:00 p.m. – 
5:00 p.m. from 11.75 to 11.50 percent , lending rate from 23 to 22.50 percent , 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturit y borrowing facilities provided for 
primary dealers via repo transactions from 19 to 18.50 percent . 
 
Readings on the last quarter of 2007 suggest that the e conomy continued to 
grow at a moderate pace. The lagged effects of monetar y tightening and the weakened 
global credit conditions restrain domestic demand. Moreov er, the expected slowdown in 
global economic activity may lead to a reduction in the  contribution of external demand 
to the economic growth. Accordingly, aggregate demand co nditions should continue to 
support disinflation. In this context, inflation is expe cted to decelerate despite the risks 
from food and energy prices. 
Drought and energy related supply shocks not only increase d inflation 
temporarily but also had short-term adverse effects on t he growth rate. The Committee 
underlined that the primary goal of the Central Ban k is to achieve price stability, and 
noted that monetary policy remains restrictive even aft er the recent rate cuts. Yet, the 
lagged impacts of the recent rate cuts are to be seen. Be sides, the Committee will 
closely monitor the second round effects of elevated food  and energy prices as well as 
developments in incomes policy, on the wage and price set ting behavior. The timing of 
further easing will depend on incoming information re garding global liquidity conditions, 
external demand, fiscal policy implementation and othe r factors affecting the medium 
term inflation outlook. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
eight working days.  