No: 2008 - 41 
30 December 2008  
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: December 18, 2008 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices increased by 0.83 percent in November and annual inflation 
declined to 10.76 percent. Processed food and energy inf lation eased on the 
back of falling commodity prices, while exchange rate pass -through to 
domestic prices remained limited. In addition, services in flation continued to 
moderate owing to the weakening in domestic demand. 
2. Processed food prices fell in November, whereas unproce ssed food prices 
continued to rise on soaring vegetable prices. Annual in flation in processed 
food prices registered a cumulative drop of 8.6 points i n four months, and is 
expected to decelerate further in the upcoming period.  
3. Owing mainly to the last year’s base effect created b y the excise tax hikes and 
the sharp increase in water rates, annual energy price i nflation declined by 6.9 
points to 24.09 percent in November. Given the reducti ons in fuel and LPG 
prices in December, energy prices will continue to support  disinflation. 
4. Annual inflation in goods excluding energy and foo d declined by about 1.3 
points to 3.83 percent, mainly on account of the modera tion in clothing price 
inflation driven by weak demand conditions. In the dur ables group (excl. gold), 
annual inflation rose by about 1 point due to the la gged impact of exchange 
rate movements. The Monetary Policy Committee (the Co mmittee) noted that 
the short-term exchange rate pass-through in durable go ods has been 
significantly lower than the levels implied by the hist orical estimates. 
5. The easing in supply shocks and the softening in domesti c demand continued 
to have a favorable impact on services prices in November , bringing its annual 
inflation down to 10.88 percent. Rent inflation conti nued to moderate. Annual 
inflation in catering prices has further declined on slow ing food inflation and 
weakening domestic demand. Moreover, the fall in fuel prices has started to  
put downward pressure on transport prices. Accordingly, sea sonally adjusted 
core inflation indicators also remained on a downward t rack. 
   Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. Third quarter GDP developments were largely consiste nt with the outlook 
provided in the October Inflation Report. Public spend ing and net exports were 
the main drivers of GDP growth. Imports contracted for the first time since the 
fourth quarter of 2001, and the contribution of net exports turned positive. On 
the other hand, the contribution of private domestic d emand declined 
considerably, especially owing to the weakening in invest ments. Thus, annual 
GDP growth in the third quarter decelerated significan tly down to 0.5 percent. 
Moreover, seasonally adjusted figures suggest that quarte rly GDP growth was 
negative in the second and third quarters of 2008. 
7. Indicators on economic activity suggest that the adverse  impact of the global 
economic downturn on both domestic and aggregate demand  has intensified 
in the fourth quarter. Readings on production, capacity  utilization, and 
business confidence point to a marked contraction in economi c activity. 
8. Ongoing problems in global financial markets have le d to a slump in consumer 
confidence. Following the sharp drop in October, consumer  confidence 
indexes remained at low levels in November. The soften ing in consumption, 
the tightening of financial conditions, and the reducti on in loan supply has 
restrained credit growth. Accordingly, consumer loans slowe d down 
considerably in October and November. 
9. Other indicators for consumer demand also suggest a wea kening in the fourth 
quarter. Domestic sales of automobiles plummeted in Octob er and November, 
falling well below the third-quarter average. Moreo ver, seasonally adjusted 
consumption indexes point to a contraction in private con sumer demand in 
November. Imports of consumer goods, especially passenger ca rs and non-
durable goods, continued to trend downward. 
10. Indicators remain weak for investments. In seasonally adjusted terms, 
machinery-equipment production fell for the fourth qu arter in a row. Imports of 
capital goods in October were below their third-quarte r average. Domestic 
sales of commercial vehicles displayed a downward trend in  October and 
November, while Business Tendency Survey pointed to a si gnificant 
deterioration in expected investment spending. 
11. Besides the marked reduction in domestic demand, fore ign demand has also 
significantly weakened due to the marked slowdown in glo bal economic 
activity. Exports fell by 6.5 percent year-on-year in October and posted a steep 
decline in seasonally adjusted terms. Exports of motor ve hicles − a key driver 
of total exports − fell by 43.9 percent year-on-year in November. The 
slowdown in imports has also intensified in October, which  was down by 15.3 
percent in year-on-year terms. Given the fact that imp orts declined at a faster pace than exports, net foreign demand is expected to ma ke a positive 
contribution to growth in the final quarter. 
12. Data on labor market confirms the significant slowdow n in economic activity. 
Non-farm employment remained flat in the third quar ter, resulting in a marked 
rise in unemployment rate. The Committee emphasized t hat the labor market 
conditions will continue to restrain domestic demand and labor costs. 
 
  Monetary Policy and Risks 
13. Recent readings indicate that the slowdown in the d omestic economic activity 
has intensified. Ongoing problems in international cred it markets and the 
global economy are expected to continue to restrain bot h the domestic and 
external demand for an extended period, putting dow nward pressure on 
inflation. The disinflation in core price indices has bee n so far limited due to 
the lagged impact of the exchange rate pass-through. Ye t, the Committee 
expects a more significant deceleration in the underlyin g inflation as the 
services inflation eases in the forthcoming period. 
14. The developments in oil and other commodity prices are having a favorable 
impact on disinflation. In fact, the contribution of en ergy and food prices is 
down by 1.4 percentage points since June. Looking ahead, energy and food 
prices are expected to continue to contribute to the disi nflation process. 
15. Although inflation expectations have shown signs of easing recently, they are 
still above the medium term targets. The Committee ju dged that inflation 
expectations will follow a downward trend in the fort hcoming period as the 
deceleration in headline inflation becomes more signifi cant. In this respect, it 
was stated that the Central Bank should put more emphasi s in its own inflation 
forecasts. 
16. In light of these assessments, the Committee judged t hat inflation would 
display a rapid fall in the forthcoming period. Accordi ngly, the Committee has 
decided to lower short-term interest rates by 125 basis p oints. The cumulative 
rate cuts have reached 175 basis points in the last two mo nths. 
17. Considering the prevailing tightness in financial co nditions and the benign 
inflation outlook, the Committee indicated that there  was room for further 
monetary accommodation. However, it was stated that, gi ven the existing 
global uncertainties, it would be appropriate to main tain flexibility regarding 
future policy decisions. In this respect, the extent and t he timing of the next 
rate cut will depend on the factors affecting inflation  outlook. 18. Uncertainties regarding the impact of the problems in financial markets on the 
real economy remain at high levels. Recently, the fore casts on global 
economic growth have been continuously revised downwards.  Given that 
factors affecting domestic inflation have been driven la rgely by global 
developments, medium term inflation risks are seen mostly  on the downside. 
19. The Central Bank will continue to take the necessary measures to contain the 
adverse effects of the global financial turmoil on the domestic economy, 
provided that they do not conflict with the price stabi lity objective. Prudent 
monetary policy is necessary but not sufficient to maintai n the resilience of the 
economy against the global financial turmoil. Preservin g the fiscal discipline 
and strengthening the structural reform agenda would a lso help to mitigate the 
adverse effects of the ongoing shocks on the domestic economy . In this 
respect, the European Union accession process and the implem entation of 
structural reforms envisaged in the economic program rema in to be of utmost 
importance. In particular, advances in structural reforms,  which would improve 
the quality of fiscal discipline and enhance productivity  gains, are monitored 
closely by the Central Bank with regard to their impli cations on 
macroeconomic and price stability. 