No: 2008-13 
                    28 May 2008  
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: May 15, 2008 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices were up 1.68 percent in April and an nual inflation rose to 9.66 
percent. The rise in inflation was largely driven by i ncreases in food and oil prices and 
lagged effects of exchange rate movements. The surge in food and energy prices 
accounted for about 6.3 percent of the annual inflatio n rate by April. 
2. The unprocessed food inflation slowed to an annualiz ed rate of 6.73 percent on the 
back of a partial correction, driven by improved weath er conditions. In contrast, 
processed food prices continued to rise at a strong pace, wi th an annual rate of 
increase of more than 20 percent in April. Annual infl ation in processed food prices is 
expected to remain at elevated levels for a while. 
3. Energy prices rose by 1.54 percent in April to an an nual rate of 17.49 percent. The 
surge in world oil prices and the depreciation of the T urkish lira pushed fuel oil prices 
higher by 4 percent in April. Fuel oil prices are expe cted to further increase in May. 
The surge in international oil prices also puts upward p ressure on natural gas and 
electricity prices. The potential hikes in electricity tar iffs implied by the automatic price 
adjustment mechanism creates short term upside risks on dome stic energy prices. 
4. Annual inflation in goods excluding energy and unp rocessed food increased by 1.6 
percentage points to 8.55 percent, driven primarily by  soaring processed food prices 
coupled with exchange rate pass-through to domestic infla tion. The lagged effects of 
exchange rate developments are predicted to put furthe r pressure in May on the 
consumer prices, especially through durable goods. 
5. The steep rise in food and energy has been having a dverse effects also on services 
inflation. Catering prices rose by 1.86 percent and pri ces for transport services were 
up 1.72 percent, recording an annual rate of increase o f 13.03 and 11.44 percent, 
respectively. Prices for services other than catering and t ransport, however, maintain 
a slower rate of increase. 
6. The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) not ed that inflation will remain 
elevated in the short term owing to lagged pass-throug h from exchange rates and 
supply shocks, yet it will start decelerating by the last quarter of 2008. 
  
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
7. Recent readings are in line with the outlook presen ted in the April Inflation Report. 
Industrial production grew at an annualized rate of 2 .4 percent in March, but was 
down 1.7 percent from February on a seasonally adjusted  basis. Based on quarterly 
averages, industrial production increased by a solid 6.9 percent annual rate during 
the first quarter of 2008, but fell by 0.7 percent fr om the previous quarter in seasonally 
adjusted terms. On balance, these figures indicate that, despite the recent slowdown 
in economic activity, the economy will display a relativ ely sizeable annual growth in 
the first quarter of 2008, mainly benefiting from th e base effect. 
8. Indicators for consumer demand point to an ongoing sl owdown in domestic demand. 
The seasonally adjusted CNBC-e consumption index continue d to trend downward in 
April, following the decline in the first quarter. Co nsumer confidence indices and 
seasonally adjusted sales of automobiles continued to decli ne in April. Moreover, first-
quarter domestic sales of white goods lagged behind the fourth quarter of 2007 on a 
seasonally adjusted basis. 
9. Leading indicators for private sector investments refl ect a similar outlook to consumer 
demand. The production of electrical machinery and appl iances and the domestic 
sales of light commercial vehicles registered a strong annu al growth rate during the 
first quarter; however, both indicators were down from  a quarter ago in seasonally 
adjusted terms. Machinery-equipment production, on the other hand, declined both on 
annual and seasonally adjusted terms. Imports of capital goods remain strong on a 
year-on-year basis, yet seasonally adjusted figures point  to a slowdown. Besides, the 
production of nonmetallic minerals continues to fall, sug gesting further weakening in 
construction activity.  
10. The economic slowdown is also evident in service-sector employment figures, which 
displayed a limited rise in the first quarter in seasona lly adjusted terms. 
11. Both exports and imports recorded high growth rate s in the first quarter of 2008. 
During this period, exports grew faster than imports in  real terms. Leading data 
released by the Turkish Exporters’ Assembly suggest that e xports have continued to 
grow at a robust pace in April and May. 
12. In sum, difficulties in international credit market s continue to restrain domestic 
demand, while external demand remains robust. Overall , aggregate demand 
conditions will continue to support disinflation. 
  
 
  Monetary Policy and Risks 
13. Moderating domestic demand has been curbing the pass through from cost-push 
factors. The prices of products that do not use food or en ergy as main inputs have 
been rather well behaved. However, the fact that fir st round effects of the supply side 
shocks have reached unprecedented levels has been affecting  inflation expectations 
adversely. In this regard, the Committee decided to im plement a measured hike in 
policy rates to contain the potential second round effect s. 
14. Inflation is expected to start decelerating in the last quarter of the year, ending 2009 
at around 6.7 percent, as forecasted in the April Infla tion Report. In the forthcoming 
period, monetary policy decisions will be geared toward s keeping inflation close to 
these forecasts. In this respect, the Committee highlighte d the importance of 
economic agents’ forecasts to be aligned with the Central  Bank forecasts. 
15. Risks to the inflation outlook exist on both sides:  
16. Continued rises in energy prices and ongoing uncerta inty in the global economy have 
increased the risks on the short-term inflation outlook.  The Committee indicated that 
oil prices have materialized at higher levels than the  path implied by our baseline 
projections in the April Inflation Report. Developmen ts in food prices, on the other 
hand, have been relatively more favorable. Although  processed food prices continued 
to rise due to lagged impact of past developments, they  are likely to decelerate on the 
back of recent moderation in agricultural commodity pri ces. Moreover, inflation in 
unprocessed food items has been easing recently, mainly ow ing to benign weather 
conditions. Overall, the Committee assessed that at this p oint there is no need to alter 
the main scenario on food prices presented in the Inflat ion Report. 
17. The fact that the economy has faced persistent and siz eable supply shocks, 
concurrently with deterioration in overall market sent iment, implies that inflation may 
display more inertia than envisaged. In this respect, th e uncertainty in food and 
energy prices also poses risks for the medium term outlook . The Central Bank will 
aim at containing the second round effects should the foo d and energy prices 
continue to rise at a rapid pace. More favorable devel opments than envisaged, on the 
other hand, will be perceived as an opportunity to im plement a faster disinflation. 
18. The extent of the slowdown in the global economy is yet to be seen and the volatility 
in the financial markets still continues to be a major so urce of uncertainty. A 
protracted period of uncertainty has been keeping risk appetite at low levels and 
leading to a slowdown in capital flows to emerging mar kets. The Committee once 
again emphasized that monetary policy would not react to temporary fluctuations in 
financial markets, but will not hesitate to implement the necessary monetary tightening should the volatility in the financial mar kets translate into a generalized 
deterioration in the pricing behavior. The Committee  also underlined that existing 
conditions in the money market allow the Central Bank  to implement an effective 
liquidity management. 
19. The Committee underscored that it would be more b eneficial if any need to tighten 
the fiscal balance, in order to meet the targets implie d by the Medium Term Financial 
Framework, would in principle be implemented largely  through expenditure cuts 
rather than higher excise taxes. Moreover, it was stated  that pre-announcing a 
schedule or a rule regarding the likely adjustments in administered prices and taxes 
would help to alleviate the level of dispersion in in flation expectations. 
20. In sum, the Central Bank will continue to take th e necessary measures to prevent the 
potential second-round effects of the adverse developmen ts in food and energy 
prices. Accordingly, the Committee will consider the possib ility of a further measured 
rate hike in the next meeting. The Committee emphasi zed that the policy stance 
presented in the Inflation Report should by no means p erceived as a commitment, as 
any new data or information related to the inflatio n outlook might lead a revision in the 
monetary policy stance. Consequently, the Committee sta ted that the extent and 
timing of possible future rate hike would depend on d evelopments in global markets, 
external demand, fiscal policy implementation, and oth er factors affecting the medium 
term inflation outlook. 
21. Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not a suffici ent condition for attaining price 
stability. The support from fiscal policy and structural r eforms are also critical in this 
respect. Preserving the resilience of the economy, especial ly under current 
conditions, requires the continuation of fiscal discipline and structural reforms. In this 
respect, the European Union accession process and the implem entation of structural 
reforms remain to be of utmost importance. In particula r, advances in structural 
reforms, which would improve the quality of fiscal discip line and enhance the 
productivity, are monitored closely with regard to the ir implications on macroeconomic 
and price stability. 
 
 