No: 2008-12 
15 May 2008 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: May 15, 2008 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah 
Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has deci ded to increase the policy 
rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate from 15.25  percent to 15.75 percent, and 
lending rate from 19.25 percent to 19.75 percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing ra te between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 
p.m. from 11.25 percent to 11.75 percent, lending rat e from 22.25 percent to 22.75 
percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity  borrowing facilities provided 
for primary dealers via repo transactions from 18.25 per cent to 18.75 percent. 
 
Recent readings confirm the outlook presented in the Apr il Inflation Report. Lagged 
pass-through impact of the exchange rate movements and risi ng energy and processed 
food prices may lead to a temporary rise in inflation in the short term. Difficulties in 
international credit markets continue to restrain the do mestic demand, while external 
demand remains strong. Overall, aggregate demand condit ions will continue to support 
disinflation. 
The Committee expects inflation to start decelerating in  the last quarter of the year, 
ending 2009 at around 6.7 percent, as forecasted in the  April Inflation Report. In the 
forthcoming period, monetary policy decisions will be ge ared towards keeping inflation 
close to these forecasts. Therefore, it is important that economic agents align their 
expectations with the Central Bank forecasts.  
The Central Bank will continue to take the necessary measu res to prevent the 
potential second-round effects of the adverse developments in food and energy prices. 
Accordingly, the Committee will consider the possibility of a further measured rate hike in 
the next meeting. The extent and timing of possible future rate hike will depend on 
developments in global markets, external demand, fiscal po licy implementation, and other 
factors affecting the medium term inflation outlook. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within eight 
working days.  
 