No: 2008 – 20 
28 July 2008 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: July 17, 2008 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices were down by 0.36 percent in June, br inging annual inflation 
down to 10.61 percent. This development was mainly dri ven by the fall in the 
annual rate of increase in unprocessed food prices, notwit hstanding ongoing 
rapid increases in processed food and energy prices. The sur ge in food and 
energy prices accounts for 6.80 percentage points of annua l inflation as of 
June. 
2. The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) not ed that unprocessed food 
prices have been relatively favorable in recent months with a decline of around 
10 percent in June, which is a significant fall even if co rrected for seasonal 
factors. The decline can largely be attributed to fresh fruit and vegetable prices 
that dropped by a remarkable 21.69 percent due to red uced exports. As a 
whole, the group’s annual inflation fell to 1.60 per cent. The Committee noted 
that the correction in unprocessed food prices might be pa rtially reversed by 
the renewed exports to Russia in early July. 
3. In contrast, processed food prices continued to increase, mainly due to a 
steep rise in bread and grain prices that hit a monthly  rate of 4.11 percent in 
June. Yet, inflation in processed food excluding bread a nd grains has 
displayed some moderation compared with the past four m onths. The 2008 
harvest is likely to produce better yields than last year , helping processed food 
inflation to moderate in the second half of the year.  
4. Energy prices increased by 1.75 percent in June amid r ising fuel and energy 
(natural gas) prices, pushing the group’s annual inflati on up to 19.8 percent. 
Energy prices are expected to rise further in July due t o increased electricity 
rates. New electricity tariff rates, which have been eff ective as of July 1, are 
likely to have a direct effect of about 0.5 points to C PI inflation. 
5. Annual inflation in clothing and footwear moderat ed in June, while inflation in 
durable consumer goods increased. Current demand and cost conditions in 
the clothing sector lead to a decline in relative price of clothing. Moreover, the 
weakening of the Turkish lira between January and April  continued to have 
lagged impacts on prices of durable goods, albeit to a l esser degree in June. 6. Annual services inflation remained flat in June. The  annual rate of increase in 
prices for catering and transport services remained elevat ed due to 
developments in food and energy prices. On the other h and, annual inflation in 
services other than transport and catering have declined by 0.44 percentage 
points over the previous month. 
7. Although second-round effects of rising oil and food prices, lagged impacts of 
exchange rate pass-through, and last year’s low base have  led to an increase 
in core inflation indicators during the second quarter o f the year, core inflation 
indicators registered a modest decline in June in seasonall y adjusted terms. 
Moreover, medium-term inflation expectations seem broa dly contained in July, 
after having deteriorated over recent months. 
8. The Committee also noted that the hikes in electricit y rates and the last year’s 
low base would lead to a significant but temporary rise  in annual inflation in 
July. 
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
9. Recent readings on supply and demand conditions are i n line with the outlook 
presented in our April Inflation Report. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in the 
first quarter grew by 6.6 percent in annual terms.  
10. Although annual percentage changes suggest a vigorou s GDP growth, 
seasonally adjusted figures point to a quarterly growth  rate of around 0.8 
percent. The year-on-year growth rate is largely driv en by the low base effect 
from the same period last year. The Committee thus emp hasized that 
seasonally adjusted figures are key to a sound assessment of the main trends 
in economic activity. Overall, seasonally adjusted figure s suggest an ongoing 
but moderating economic activity. 
11. On the expenditures front, GDP growth was mostly d riven by private demand, 
whereas public expenditures had a limited contribution to growth. Although 
total final domestic demand increased by 7.5 percent comp ared with a year 
earlier, it posted a quarterly decline in seasonally ad justed terms. 
12. With exports having accelerated in recent months, th e negative contribution of 
net external demand to growth has been smaller than t he two preceding 
quarters. Compared with a quarter ago, the contributi on of domestic demand 
to growth has fallen while that of net foreign deman d has picked up on a 
seasonally adjusted basis. 
13. Recent indicators point to a further slowdown in con sumer demand in the 
second quarter. Consumer confidence indices were down from  a quarter ago, while the slowdown in real consumer loans continued. The  seasonally 
adjusted CNBC-e consumption index continued to fall in the second quarter. 
The production of chemicals also declined further. Furnit ure manufacturing 
picked up in the second quarter, yet remained weaker tha n it was in periods of 
vigorous demand. Domestic sales of automobiles displayed a  significant fall 
during January-June period. Imports of consumer goods also  declined during 
the same period, particularly due to a dramatic decline  in the demand for 
passenger cars. 
14. Investment demand followed a similar pattern to co nsumer demand in recent 
months. Domestic sales of light and heavy commercial vehicl es were weaker 
compared to the previous quarter, while the production  of machinery-
equipment and electric machinery remained flat. Import s of capital goods were 
down in quarterly terms during January-June on the back of a slump in 
transport vehicles. Excluding those vehicles, imports of in vestment goods 
were still falling, albeit more modestly. 
15. Despite a slight rebound in the first quarter of 2 008, housing permits, which 
have been flat since early 2006, remained stable in th e second quarter in 
seasonally adjusted terms. The total number of constructio n permits in the first 
quarter was down by 1 percent from a year ago. The slo wdown in the private 
construction sector is even more notable once the positive contribution from 
the public sector is excluded. Moreover, the fact that pr oduction of nonmetallic 
minerals grow at a lower pace than the exports suggest t hat the domestic 
construction activity has continued to moderate. 
16. External demand remained strong. The export quan tity index increased by 
18.2 percent in the first quarter, and by 11.4 percent  during April-May in 
annual terms. Seasonally adjusted figures point to an o ngoing yet slightly 
moderating growth in exports in real terms. The robust  pace of exports and the 
recent slowdown in imports suggest that the contribution of net exports will be 
higher in the second quarter compared to the previous q uarter. 
17. Although external demand remained robust, annual  growth rate in industrial 
production moderated to 4.2 percent during April-May period. Seasonally 
adjusted figures suggest that industrial production expan ded at a subdued 
pace during the first quarter and grew moderately in the second quarter. 
18. First quarter data on the labor market point to a  modest recovery in aggregate 
terms, although employment in services continue to slow d own. During the 
March-May period, non-farm employment rose by 2.4 per cent over a year ago, 
while non-farm unemployment fell by 0.1 points to 12 .3 percent. The 
Committee emphasized that current conditions in the lab or market continue to 
restrain the unit labor costs and domestic demand. 19. Labor productivity indicators based on the value-ad ded in the non-farm sector 
continued to rise in the first quarter, partially offse tting the cost-push factors 
imposed by surging world oil and commodity prices on the  real marginal costs. 
20. In sum, difficulties in international credit markets continue to restrain the 
domestic demand, while external demand remains relativ ely robust. Overall, 
aggregate demand conditions continue to support disinfla tion 
 
 Monetary Policy and Risks 
21. The meeting agenda also included an assessment of the  inflation forecasts 
and their underlying assumptions to appear in the July Inflation Report. 
Despite the favorable developments in the unprocessed fo od inflation, 
processed food prices increased at a faster pace than anticip ated. Therefore, 
the Committee envisioned a slightly higher path for t he food prices compared 
to the previous Report. Considering that oil prices hav e been drifting at 
significantly higher levels than assumed in the previous Report, the Committee 
noted that the revised assumptions for oil prices should i ncorporate some 
room for caution.  
22. Consequently, inflation forecasts, which incorporate the revised assumptions 
for oil and food prices, suggest that inflation will sta y at high levels for a short 
period before gradually moderating towards the 7.5 p ercent target by the end 
of 2009. The Committee underscored that, adverse impact s of the supply side 
shocks on the economy would be more limited should the eco nomic agents 
align their expectations for the next three years with  the target rates of 7.5 
percent, 6.5 percent and 5.5 percent, respectively. 
23. The revised inflation forecasts are based on quite co nservative assumptions 
for food and energy prices, implying that downside risks  on these factors are 
as significant as upside risks. Should the upside risks materia lize, monetary 
policy will be conducted so as to minimize upside deviati ons from the targets. 
Downward surprises in food and energy prices, on the oth er hand, will be 
perceived as an opportunity to bring inflation back to target in a shorter period 
than envisaged in our baseline scenario. 
24. Despite the expected decline in inflation in the m edium term, uncertainties 
exist regarding the degree of inflation persistence. Lo ng-lasting supply shocks 
have been keeping headline inflation at elevated lev els and thus increasing 
the risk of rising backward looking schemes in the wage and price setting 
behavior. Although the widening output gap should con tain the second round 
effects of the supply shocks, the exact pace of disinflation would still depend 
on the extent new inflation targets serve as a strong r eference for economic 
agents. Having this in mind, the CBT will continue to focus on enhancing the credibility of the new inflation targets. In this conte xt, developments in the 
general pricing behavior and the underlying inflatio n trends will be monitored 
closely. 
25. International financial markets remain fragile and  the credit conditions continue 
to tighten up. The eventual impact of the financial t urmoil on the global 
economic activity is yet to be seen. Moreover, rising comm odity prices 
continue to be a threat for price stability. These uncer tainties have been 
dampening the risk appetite and thus slowing down the ca pital flows to 
emerging markets, leaving these economies susceptible to shi fts in the market 
sentiment. Domestic uncertainties have exacerbated these e ffects, as 
manifested by the significant rise in the sovereign credi t risk of Turkey in the 
first half of the year, compared to the average risk pr emium of emerging 
economies. The CBT will not display a sharp reaction to temporary fluctuations 
in the financial markets, unless there is a long lasting d eterioration in 
expectations and a significant worsening in the general pricing behavior. 
26. Finally, our medium-term projections assume that go vernment expenditures 
will evolve in line with the official projections and that there will be no further 
increases in indirect taxes or administered price adjustmen ts, except those 
required by the automatic pricing mechanisms. Any deviat ion from this 
framework may lead to a revision of the outlook for in flation and monetary 
policy. 
27. Regarding the monetary tightening since May, the Committee indicated that 
the current level of the policy rate was supportive of disinflation. Yet, it was 
also emphasized that ongoing uncertainties and supply sid e shocks continued 
to pose risks on inflation. Therefore, the Committee me mbers assessed that 
monetary policy should continue to maintain a cautious st ance. Accordingly, a 
further measured rate hike would be considered, when ne eded, to prevent the 
potential second-round effects of the risk factors. The Com mittee once again 
underlined that the timing of a possible future rate hike would depend on 
developments in global markets, external demand, fiscal policy 
implementation, and other factors affecting the medium  term inflation outlook. 
28. The Committee also indicated that it would be usef ul to clarify some issues 
related to operational aspects of monetary policy. Excess liquidity sterilized in 
the overnight market has been shrinking in the second hal f of 2008 due to a 
reduction in the amount of FX purchased through regula r auctions; fall in 
Treasury’s foreign debt rollover ratio, and rising mon ey demand. Accordingly, 
the Central Bank has provided the required liquidity into the system via repo 
auctions, targeting overnight interest rates to materia lize at levels close to 
Central Bank borrowing rate. Still, there has been som e undesired volatility in 
the overnight rates due to unforeseen movements in the  liquidity, mainly arising from the banks’ demand for reserves. Considering these 
developments, the Committee has decided to reduce the m argin between the 
borrowing and the lending rates by 50 basis points. 
29. Current projections do not point to a permanent sh ortage in the liquidity. In 
case of a temporary shortage, the Central Bank will pro vide the required 
liquidity through repo auctions, targeting the overni ght interest rate in the 
money market to stay close to the Central Bank borrowing  rate. Hence, the 
key policy rate will continue to be Central Bank’s overn ight borrowing rate. 
30. Prudent monetary policy is a necessary but not a suff icient condition for 
attaining price stability. The support from fiscal policy  and structural reforms 
are also critical in this respect. Sound fiscal policy has be en one of the main 
factors in driving inflation down to single digits. The  role of fiscal policy will 
continue to be critical in the road to price stability. Preserving the resilience of 
the economy, especially under current conditions, require s the continuation of 
fiscal discipline and structural reforms. In this respect, th e European Union 
accession process and the implementation of structural refor ms envisaged in 
the economic program remain to be of utmost importance.  In particular, 
advances in structural reforms, which would improve the q uality of fiscal 
discipline and enhance the productivity, are monitored closely by the CBT with 
regard to their implications on macroeconomic and price st ability. 
 
 
 