No: 2008 - 29 
        24 October 2008 
 
 
THE CBRT PRESS RELEASE ON  
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE SELLING AUCTIONS   
 
Recent problems in global credit markets have led t o concerns on the 
credibility of the global financial system. These d evelopments have adversely 
affected the global liquidity flows and triggered a n extraordinary demand for liquidity 
especially in USD.    
Acting promptly and in a coordinated manner, centra l banks are taking 
decisions in an effort to overcome the liquidity sq ueeze in money markets. In line with 
these efforts, decisions and actions of the Central  Bank of Turkey (CBRT) also aim to 
maintain the smooth functioning of all domestic mon ey markets.    
Within this framework, starting from today the CBRT  has decided to inject 
foreign exchange liquidity into the market through foreign exchange selling 
auctions  under the basic principles of the floating exchang e rate regime, as 
unhealthy fluctuations have been witnessed recently  in foreign exchange market due 
to a decrease in the depth of the market.   
The daily amount of foreign exchange  to be  sold via auctions has been set as 
USD 50 million, which can be raised on the auction days when deemed necessary. 
Guidelines for foreign exchange selling auctions is  annexed herewith. Depending on 
the developments in the foreign exchange market, th e daily auction amounts may be 
changed with prior notice, while the auctions may b e suspended as well, when 
deemed necessary.  
In addition, the CBRT may intervene the market via directly selling foreign 
exchange as it did before, in cases where, despite the forei gn exchange selling 
auction, supply falls excessively short of meeting the demand for foreign exchange, 
and/or an excessive volatility in exchange rates du e to speculative behaviour 
originating from liquidity shortage is observed.  
 
 
  ANNEX:  Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Selling Auctions : 
1. The institutions authorized to operate in the Fo reign Exchange and Banknotes 
Markets may participate in the auction. 
2. No auctions will be held on days when payments s ystems are closed in the USA 
even if it is a working day in Turkey, in half-work ing days and on days when direct 
foreign exchange intervention by the CBRT takes pla ce prior to the start of the 
auction.  
3. The amount to be sold via the auction and the au ction number will be posted on 
Reuters page CBTQ at 1:30 p.m. and the banks will s ubmit their offers between 1:40 
– 2:00 p.m. The offers will be sent via Electronic Fund Transfer (EFT) as before.  
4. The auction will be held under the multiple pric e method.  
5. The results for auctions will be posted on Reute rs page CBTQ.  
6. The minimum amount to be offered will be USD 1 m illion and multiples thereof. 
7. The maximum amount to be offered for the auction s by each bank will be limited to 
40 percent of the total auction amount. 
8. Banks will not be able to change their offer amo unts and/or prices during the auction. 
9. In case there is more than one offer for the pri ce where the auction is finalized, the 
distribution will be made on pro-rata basis. 
10. The banks that do not fulfill their obligations  arising from the auctions will be subject 
to the sanctions specified in the Implementation In structions of the Foreign Exchange 
and Banknotes Markets.        
 