No: 2008-23 
18 September 2008 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: September 18, 2008 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has deci ded to keep policy 
rates unchanged as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 16.75 p ercent, and lending rate at 
20.25 percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00  p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate at 12.75 percent, lending rate at 23. 25 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity  borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions at 19. 25 percent. 
 
Recent readings indicate a significant slowdown in domesti c economic activity. 
Ongoing problems in international credit markets and th e global economy continue to 
restrain both the domestic and external demand. Moreover , favorable outlook in food 
prices and the sharp decline in oil prices will support di sinflation. Accordingly, inflation is 
expected to continue to fall gradually in the forthcomi ng period. 
The Committee assessed that the course of oil and food pr ices has been closer 
to the optimistic scenario outlined in the July Inflatio n Report and reiterated that the 
current level of the policy rate is supportive of disinfla tion. Therefore, a measured rate 
cut will be considered should the favorable outlook in in flation and commodity prices 
continue. Yet, recently heightened uncertainties in the  global financial markets require 
monetary policy to remain cautious. Future decisions on p olicy rates will depend on 
domestic and external demand, developments in global mar kets, fiscal policy 
implementation, and other factors affecting the medium  term inflation outlook. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informati on related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
eight working days.  
 