No: 2008-27 
22 October 2008  
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: October 22, 2008 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has d ecided to adjust the 
policy rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate is left  unchanged at 16.75 percent, 
while lending rate is decreased from 20.25 percent to 19.75 percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate between 4:00 p.m. – 
5:00 p.m. is left unchanged at 12,75 percent, while  lending rate is decreased 
from 23,25 percent to 22,75 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week matu rity borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions is decreased from 19.25 
percent to 18.75 percent. 
Recent readings indicate a significant slowdown in domestic economic activity. 
Ongoing problems in international credit markets an d the global economy continue to 
restrain both the domestic and external demand. Inf lationary impact of the recent 
exchange rate movements will be offset by the favor able outlook in food prices and the 
sharp decline in oil prices. Inflation is expected to display a limited and temporary rise in 
October due to volatile food prices, yet continue t o decline gradually in the medium 
term. Accordingly, the Committee at this point does  not envision a significant revision in 
medium term inflation forecasts. 
However, it should be noted that the intensificatio n of the financial market turmoil 
requires caution in terms of both the monetary poli cy and the inflation outlook. 
In this respect, the Committee decided to keep borr owing rates –the key policy 
rates– unchanged, while lowering the lending rates by 50 basis points in order to 
contain the potential volatility in short term inte rest rates. 
The meeting agenda also included an assessment of t he developments in foreign 
exchange markets. The Committee emphasized the impo rtance of a liquid foreign 
exchange market under current conditions and stated  that supporting the liquidity 
positions of the banks should be the priority, and suggested that raising the transaction 
limits at the Foreign Exchange Deposit Markets woul d be helpful in this regard. 
Moreover, the Committee agreed that other measures would be implemented as 
needed. 
The Central Bank will continue to take the necessar y measures to contain the 
adverse effects of the global financial turmoil on the domestic economy. Future policy 
decisions will largely depend on the developments i n global markets and their 
reflections on the local financial markets. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance . 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
eight working days.  