No: 2008-05
25 February 2008

SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING
Meeting Date: February 14, 2008
Inflation Developments
1. Consumer prices rose by 0.80 percent in January, bringing annual inflation to
8.17 percent. Despite sharp price hikes in energy items such as electricity and
natural gas, the partial correction in unprocessed food prices and the
decelerating services inflation pulled the headline inflation down in January.
2. Although unprocessed food prices were up by 2.96 percent in January, the
base effect from the dramatic upsurge during the same period last year
brought the group’s annual inflation rate down to 5 percent. Processed food
inflation, on the other hand, continued to rise on the back of increasing
worldwide wheat and grain prices, reaching 13.36 percent per annum.
3. The annual growth rate in energy prices rose by 16.26 percent in January
mainly owing to sizable hikes in electricity and natural gas tariffs. Electricity
prices increased by 19.19 percent and natural gas prices went up by 8.04
percent, which in total added by 0.56 points to January inflation. Fuel prices,
another energy item, remained almost unchanged during the month.
4. The annual rate of inflation in goods excluding energy and unprocessed food
remained unchanged from December. Deeper discounts in clothing and
footwear items during January compared to earlier years lowered the group’s
year-on-year inflation to 2 percent. Prices of durables (excluding gold) rose by
1.03 percent in response to higher furniture prices, reversing the downward
trend in durables good inflation since June 2007. Gold prices were up by 8.75
percent.
5. Annual services inflation moderated despite the marked rise in transportation
rates. In January, The VAT cut had a smaller effect on catering and
accommodation prices, but public dormitory fees classified under this group
went up significantly. Rent inflation, on the other hand, has continued to
decelerate and yielded an annual decline of 5 percentage points over the past
twelve months. Disinflation in services is expected to continue in the upcoming
period.
6. The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) underlined that unfavorable
weather conditions may lead to a significant rise in unprocessed food prices in

February compared with the same period in 2007, possibly leading to a
temporary upward shift in annual inflation. Inflation excluding food and energy
items is expected to remain close to 4 percent.

Factors Affecting Inflation
7. Recent readings suggest that the economy continues to grow at a moderate
pace. Industrial production grew by 5 percent in annual terms during the last
quarter of 2007. Also, quarter on quarter growth rate was significantly positive
in seasonally adjusted terms.
8. Industrial production declined annually in December 2007, as there were fewer
working days compared to the previous year due to the religious holiday. The
January capacity utilization rates and production expectations of the industrial
sector along with the low base effect of the same period of the previous year,
suggest that industrial production in January may display a sizeable growth on
annual basis. For a better evaluation of the main trend in the manufacturing
industry, December and January data should be read together. Taking this into
account, the Committee assessed that industrial production continues to grow
modestly.
9. The strong Turkish lira fosters the demand for imported goods. As a matter of
fact, the quantity of consumer good imports, particularly automobiles and
durables, rose sharply during the last quarter of 2007 compared to the same
period of the previous year. Also domestic sales of automobiles displayed a
quite significant rise, in both annual and quarterly terms, during OctoberDecember period. Even though automobile sales in January were down from
December, they still increased by 37.7 percent in annual terms.
10. Although the relative price effect stimulates demand in industries like
consumer durables, the weakened global credit conditions restrain the overall
domestic demand. In fact, consumer loans, which displayed some acceleration
in the second half of 2007, settled back into a pattern of mild growth following
the turmoil in mature markets. Moreover, according to the Consumer
Tendency Survey, household spending on automobiles, durables and semidurables is on the decline.
11. Machinery-equipment production, a key indicator of investment activities, fell
4.4 percent in annual terms in the fourth quarter of 2007 but was up from the
previous quarter in seasonally adjusted terms. During the same period,
electrical machinery production increased by 23.3 percent annually, backed by
vigorous export growth. Domestic sales of heavy commercial vehicles
displayed sharp rises in January on a monthly and yearly basis. The
Committee noted that the recent rise in domestic sales of heavy commercial

vehicles did not point to a overheating when the significant slowdown in the
past two years is taken into account. Imports of capital goods increased both
annually and quarterly. Notwithstanding the relative price effect driven by the
strong currency, uncertainties in global markets are expected to restrain
investment demand in the forthcoming period.
12. The fact that nonmetallic mineral manufacturing has been contributing less to
industrial production since 2005 confirms the slowdown in the construction
sector. In January, the rate of capacity utilization in this industry declined in
annual terms. Besides, the diffusion index based on “consumers’ intention to
buy or build a house during the next twelve months” from the Consumer
Tendency Survey, continues to trend downward, which suggests that the
construction industry might weaken further in the upcoming period.
13. External demand does not display a significant deceleration at this point. The
export quantity index rose by 7.1 percent during October-December 2007
compared to a year earlier. According to the records of Turkish Exporters
Assembly, annual export growth amounted to 49.3 percent in January in US
dollars, and exports will expand further in February. Yet, the low base effect
from the previous year should be taken into account in reading these figures.
Excluding seasonal patterns and price movements, the real export growth
remains modest. Yet, the expected slowdown in global economic activity may
lead to a reduction in the contribution of external demand to economic growth
in the medium term.
14. Overall, assessments on broad economic activity suggest that aggregate

demand conditions will continue to support disinflation.

Monetary Policy and Risks
15. Uncertainties regarding the developments in mature markets restrain the
recovery in domestic demand. In fact, consumer confidence indices display a
downward trend since September. Recently, medium and long term loan rates
have been following a flat course despite the policy rate cuts, suggesting that
ongoing difficulties in the global credit markets partly offset the impact of
monetary easing on the credit supply.
16. Monetary conditions continue to support disinflation. The Committee noted
that monetary policy remains restrictive even after the recent rate cuts. The
modest growth rate of the monetary indicators point to a similar picture. The
currency remains strong, curbing inflationary pressures and easing the impact
of rising commodity prices on domestic production costs. The recent upward
movement in medium to long term interest rate can be explained by an
increase in the risk premium rather than the deterioration in inflation

expectations. As a matter of fact, survey based inflation expectations series
show no indication of worsening in inflation expectations.
17. Considering the size and the duration of ongoing supply-side shocks, the
Committee has been citing the core indicators frequently. Although its highest
priority is price stability, the CBT, in line with its medium term approach, will
not react aggressively to the shocks beyond the control of monetary policy, as
doing so could create undesirable fluctuations in economic activity and
distortions in relative prices. In this context, the period in which inflation
reaches to the target will depend on the course of food and energy prices.
18. Risks to the inflation outlook can be summarized as follows:
19. Inflation expectations were not affected by the energy price hikes in January,
possibly indicating that inflation targets continue to serve as an anchor for
expectations. Yet, the main risk factor for the current medium term inflation
outlook is a potential second round effect of the accumulated supply shocks,
which may also create a higher than expected inflation inertia. The course of
agricultural commodity prices, oil prices and the rigidity in medium term
inflation expectations has been feeding these risks. Although the Committee
has taken these factors into account in January Inflation Report, the risks
originating from a potential second round impact of elevated food and energy
prices should not be overlooked. Therefore, the Committee will keep a close
eye on the price setting behavior along with various core inflation measures.
The policy strategy will be to tolerate the first-round impact on inflation
resulting from food and energy prices, yet to remain responsive to the second
round effects.
20. The difficulties in the mature markets continue, despite the measures taken by
the central banks. Although there is an increasing consensus that the world
economy will slow down, there is still considerable uncertainty regarding the
degree and extent of the slowdown. Our baseline scenario assumes a soft
landing in developed economies, with no major portfolio shock on the Turkish
financial markets. However, the probability of a sharper than expected
slowdown should not be ruled out. While the possibility of a sharper than
envisaged slowdown in global economic activity, through a portfolio shock and
its potential impact on the exchange rates, may constitute an upside risk for
the short-term inflation outlook, it also poses downside risks for inflation in the
medium term through a possible weakening in external and domestic demand.
21. Maintaining the prudent fiscal policy during an episode of worsening risk
appetite is of utmost importance. Our medium term projections are based on
the assumption that government expenditure targets will be met in 2008.
Moreover, we assume that any extra need to readjust the primary budget
balance will be implemented primarily through expenditure cuts rather than

hikes in indirect taxes. Any deviation from this assumption may alter the
inflation and monetary policy outlook.
22. The Committee underlines that oil and food prices affect inflation all over the
world, and Turkey has been one of the rare countries managing to deliver a
significant decline in inflation in 2007. Although unprocessed food prices may
display temporary fluctuations, inflation excluding energy and food items is
expected to remain close to 4 percent. Yet, ongoing uncertainties in the global
economy and the risks to the price setting behavior compel the CBT to be
attentive to the incoming information. Accordingly, the Committee will closely
monitor the lagged impacts of the recent rate cuts. Besides, the second round
effects on the wage and price setting behavior of elevated food and energy
prices and of the developments in incomes policy will be watched closely. The
timing of further easing will depend on developments regarding global market
conditions, external demand, fiscal policy implementation, and other factors
affecting the medium term inflation outlook.
23. So far, Turkish economy has been resilient to reappraisal of risks in global
financial markets. However, the support from fiscal policy and structural
reforms are critical in preserving the resilience of the economy against
possible further deterioration in global sentiment. In this respect, the European
Union accession process and the implementation of structural reforms
envisaged in the economic program remain crucial. In particular, advances in
structural reforms, which would improve the quality of fiscal discipline and
enhance the productivity, are monitored closely by the CBT with regard to their
implications on macroeconomic and price stability.

