No: 2008-07 
31 March 2008 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: March 19, 2008 
 
Inflation Developments  
1. Consumer prices rose by 1.29 percent in February, bri nging annual inflation to 
9.10 percent. The rise in annual inflation was mainly driven by the sharp 
increase in unprocessed food prices, as highlighted in our previous Summary 
of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting. The annual  CPI inflation excluding 
unprocessed food remained unchanged from the preceding m onth. 
2. In February, food prices were up by 5.05 percent, r ecording the highest 
monthly increase since the introduction of the 2003-base- year index. Fresh 
vegetable prices displayed an unusual rise due to adverse  weather conditions. 
On the other hand, the high rate of increase in Febru ary also brings about the 
possibility of a correction in vegetable prices in March. Processed food 
inflation also remained on an upward trend. Bread an d cereal prices have 
continued to increase in response to elevated domestic and  global wheat 
prices. Moreover, higher import prices for food manufact uring industries put 
upward pressure on processed food prices through both inte rmediate goods 
and imported final consumer goods. Therefore, prices of processed food other 
than bread and cereal have also shown high rates of incr ease. Accordingly, 
the course of processed food prices remains as a risk, as it wa s highlighted in 
the January Inflation Report. 
3. Energy prices increased by 0.30 percent in February, rai sing this group’s 
annual inflation rate to 16.35 percent. Prices of dome stic fuel products went up 
by 0.83 percent along with rising world oil prices, whi le prices of energy-
related housing utilities remained almost unchanged. Th e current elevation of 
oil prices not only poses a threat to domestic fuel prices,  but also puts upward 
pressure on prices of energy-related housing utilities. T he energy prices in CPI 
are expected to rise further in March.  
4. The year-on-year increase in prices of goods excluding  energy and 
unprocessed food has been flat for the third consecutive m onth. In terms of 
the sub-groups, clothing and footwear inflation continu ed to decelerate in 
annual terms. The annual inflation in consumer durable s was slightly down in 
January. Gold prices, on the other hand, continued to a dd pressure on 
headline inflation. 
5. Services inflation continues to decelerate. The annua l rate of increase in rents 
moderated further in February to 15 percent. The stea dy decline in rent inflation for the past ten months is considered to be a favorable development 
by the Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee). Ye t, price hikes in 
catering and transport services due to soaring food and e nergy prices curbed 
the downtrend in services inflation.  
6. Against this background, the Committee assesses that risin g global 
uncertainty and the adverse developments in food and e nergy prices may lead 
to some delay in reaching the inflation target. Moreo ver, it should be noted that 
last year’s base effect may lead to an upward trend in annual core inflation 
indicators, starting from the second quarter of the year . 
Factors Affecting Inflation  
7. The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rate for Janua ry-September 2007 
is revised upwards to 5 percent from 3.8 percent, due to  the new methodology 
employed by the TURKSTAT. The revision did not bring  a major change for 
the main trends in the GDP growth. The average quart erly GDP growth rate, 
which was 2.2 percent between 2003Q3-2006Q2, has become 0.8 percent in 
the 2006Q3-2007Q3 period following the strong moneta ry tightening. 
8. Current indicators suggest that the output continues t o grow at a moderate 
pace. Industrial production in January increased by 11.7 percent annually, 
consistent with the assessment of the Committee in the Feb ruary meeting. 
When corrected for the the number of working days, annu al rate of growth in 
the industrial production drops to 5.2 percent, pointin g to a considerable base 
effect. Seasonally adjusted industrial production in Janu ary is higher than the 
December figures, yet still below the levels recorded in  October and 
November. February export figures and other leading indicators suggest that 
industrial production continues to grow, albeit at a mo derating pace. 
9. Domestic automobiles sales, one of the key indicators fo r consumer demand, 
has shown high growth rates in annual terms during the first two months of the 
year, but remained well below the levels recorded in the last quarter of 2007 in 
seasonally adjusted terms. Domestic sales of white goods in January 2008 fell 
by 18.9 percent in annual terms. After adjusting for se asonality, white goods 
sales fell significantly from the previous month, and ha ve been lower than the 
2007-fourth quarter levels. Similarly, the monthly a verage of the seasonally 
adjusted CNBC-e Consumption Index for January-February  period was also 
below the level observed in the previous quarter. Mor eover, according to 
CBT’s Consumer Tendency Survey, spending on automobiles,  houses, 
durables and semi-durables remained low. Consumer confid ence indices have 
been declining since September. Consumer credits have cont inued to 
moderate during the first quarter of 2008, due to un certainties in global credit 
markets. 10. On the other hand, imports of consumer goods continu ed to accelerate in 
January both in annual and monthly terms. However, th e tightening in credit 
conditions and the recent developments in exchange rates are likely to curb 
import growth. 
11. Investment spending has continued to slow down. The growth rate of private 
machinery-equipment investments was revised downward for  the first nine 
months of 2007. The revision revealed that machinery-e quipment growth rate 
in investments was declining during this period. Recent m achinery-equipment 
production figures indicate that investments remain on a  downward track. 
Seasonally adjusted machinery-equipment production, whi ch had decreased 
on a quarterly basis starting from the second quarter of  2007, declined both in 
annual and quarterly terms in January. Electrical machin ery production also 
went down in January in seasonally adjusted terms. Impor ts of capital goods, 
on the other hand, continued to rise sharply in January  both on a yearly and 
monthly basis. Despite the rebound in January-February period, sales of 
heavy commercial vehicles are still below the levels recor ded during the times 
of vigorous domestic demand. 
12.  Non-metallic mineral production, which is among key  indicators of 
construction activity, remained unchanged in 2007 in ann ual terms. Seasonally 
adjusted figure for January 2008 was below the average  level of the previous 
quarter. The turmoil in global financial markets and i ts likely impact on the 
domestic economy signal that the slowdown in the constructi on industry may 
continue. CBT’s Consumer Tendency Survey data on “consume rs’ likeliness to 
buy or build a house during the next twelve months” su pport this outlook. 
13. Deterioration in the overall investment sentiment  is also evident in the results 
of Istanbul Chamber of Industry’s (ICI) Economic Outlook Survey for the 
second half of 2007. Accordingly, corporate profitabilit y fell substantially in 
annual terms. While the number of firms making new inv estments fell partly 
due to decreases in profitability, we observe an increase  in firms’ tendency to 
invest abroad. 
14. External demand maintained its steady growth duri ng the first quarter. 
According to data from Turkish Exporters’ Assembly, annual  export growth 
measured in US dollars amounted to 40.7 percent in Feb ruary, and leading 
indicators for March also suggest a strong export growth i n nominal terms. 
Since exports are growing largely due to movements in the terms of trade, the 
quantity indexes could provide a better indicator for the underlying trends in 
exports. In that sense, the robust growth in seasonally a djusted quantity 
indexes during January reveal that exports remain stron g. 
15. The slowdown in the economic activity is also evident  in the non-farm 
employment data for the fourth quarter of 2007. The  fourth-quarter non-farm employment remained unchanged from a year earlier, w hereas non-farm 
unemployment rate rose by 0.4 percentage points annual ly and reached 12.6 
percent. Seasonally adjusted non-farm unemployment, on  the other hand, 
declined for the first time since the second quarter of 2 003.  
16. In conclusion, although the readings related to the  first couple of months of 
2008 indicate an ongoing but moderating growth, deep ening problems in 
international credit markets have increased the downside risks.  
 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
17. Increased volatility in financial markets and tighte ned credit conditions are 
likely to restrain the domestic demand in the forthcomin g period.  Accordingly, 
the Committee assessed that aggregate demand conditions w ill continue to 
support disinflation. 
18. Recent rise in the market interest rates can mostly be  attributed to the 
reflections of global risks on the domestic environment. M ovements in 
exchange rates resulting from the financial market volat ility may have adverse 
effects on inflation in the short term. On the other h and, given the weak 
demand conditions, exchange rate pass-through should be r elatively limited at 
this point. 
19. Notwithstanding the moderation in domestic demand,  some risks remain for 
the inflation outlook:  
20. Recent research conducted by the staff of the Central  Bank of Turkey (CBT) 
suggests that economic agents lately have been attaching m ore weight to past 
inflation in forming their expectations. This observati on implies that 
accumulated impact of the hikes in food and energy prices not only puts delay 
on the disinflation process but also impedes the improvem ent in inflation 
expectations. Besides, the movements in exchange rates and  the heightened 
risk aversion may have further adverse impact on inflati on expectations. 
Deterioration in inflation expectations has increased th e uncertainty regarding 
the second round effects of the supply side shocks, thereby h ighlighting the 
risks of higher-than-envisaged inertia in inflation dyn amics. Yet, medium term 
inflation expectations still point to a declining infla tion trend, indicating that 
inflation targets, to some extent, continue to serve as a medium term anchor. 
The Committee will continue to monitor the main tren ds in inflation 
expectations closely.  
21. Uncertainties in the global economy pose risks to the inflation outlook through 
possible portfolio effects and thus movements in exchange rates. The difficulties in the money and capital markets of the dev eloped economies 
continue, despite the relevant measures taken by the cent ral banks. This 
process also affects the domestic markets.  The CBT monitors t he 
developments in financial markets with caution.  
22. Maintaining the prudent fiscal policy is of utmost i mportance under current 
circumstances. Our medium term projections are based on the  assumption 
that government expenditure targets will be met in 2 008. Moreover, we 
assume that any extra need to readjust the primary bud get balance will be 
implemented through expenditure cuts rather than hikes in indirect taxes. Any 
deviation from this assumption may alter the inflation  and monetary policy 
outlook. 
23. The Committee assessed that rising global uncertainty  and the adverse 
developments in food and energy prices might lead to so me delay in reaching 
the inflation target. Monetary policy remains focused o n attaining the 4 percent 
inflation target in the medium term. However, reacti ng aggressively to supply-
side shocks would lead to undesired fluctuations in the out put. Therefore, 
current conditions necessitate the need to remain flexibl e. In that sense, the 
period inflation reaches the target may vary dependin g on the developments in 
commodity and financial markets. 
24. In sum, ongoing uncertainties in the global economy  and the risks to the price 
setting behavior have increased the need for the monet ary policy to be more 
cautious. The Committee will continue to closely monitor  the second round 
effects of the elevated food and energy prices. Monetar y policy remains 
restrictive even after the recent rate cuts. Future rate  cuts will depend on 
developments regarding global market conditions, extern al demand, fiscal 
policy implementation, and other factors affecting the medium term inflation 
outlook. 
25. The support from fiscal policy and structural reforms are critical in preserving 
the resilience of the economy under current conditions. I n this respect, the 
European Union accession process and the implementation of  structural 
reforms envisaged in the economic program remain crucial.  In particular, 
advances in structural reforms, which would improve the q uality of fiscal 
discipline and enhance the productivity, are monitored closely by the CBT with 
regard to their implications on macroeconomic and price st ability. 