No: 2008-16              26 June 2008 
 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: June 16, 2008 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices increased by 1.49 percent in May  and annual inflation rose to 10.74 
percent. The rise in food and energy prices continu ed to be the major driver of 
inflation, accounting for about 7 percentage points  of annual inflation as of May.  
2. The year-on-year rate of increase in food and no nalcoholic beverages surged to an 
all-time high of 15.69 percent since the inception of the new consumer index in 2003. 
Even though fresh fruit and vegetable prices displa yed some correction, inflation in 
other unprocessed food prices continued to rise, dr iving up annual inflation in overall 
unprocessed food to 8.26 percent in May. Yet, a fur ther correction in fresh fruit and 
vegetable prices is likely to be observed in June a s well. Meanwhile, the processed 
food prices continued to accelerate in May, pushing  the group’s annual inflation as 
high as 22.83 percent. Sub-groups, particularly bre ad and grain prices and prices for 
oils and fats, continued to increase markedly. The annual inflation in processed food 
prices is expected to remain elevated for some time .  
3. Energy prices were up 0.77 percent in May to an annual rate of 17.70 percent, as fuel 
prices rose by 2.58 percent due to record-high worl d oil prices. Domestic energy 
prices are likely to continue increasing in the sho rt term on the back of the adoption of 
automatic price adjustment mechanism in setting ele ctricity tariffs. 
4. Inflation in goods excluding energy and unproces sed food increased by 1.35 
percentage points to an annual rate of 9.90 percent  in May, of which 7.40 percentage 
points can be explained by the rise in processed fo od prices. 
5. The impact of higher food and energy prices on s ervices inflation continued into May. 
Prices for catering and transport services have sho wn a monthly increase of 1.82 and 
1.79 percent, respectively, which together accounte d for almost half of the annual 
services inflation rate of 9.86 percent. The Moneta ry Policy Committee (the 
Committee) noted that prices for services other tha n catering and transport remained 
relatively flat, and that the annual rental inflati on registered a decline of 6 points over 
the past one year.  
6. Core inflation indicators have continued to rise  due to first and second round effects 
of the ongoing supply shocks. The Committee stated that inflation is expected to 
decelerate starting the final quarter of the year, although base effects are likely to 
keep annual inflation at elevated levels in the sho rt term.   Factors Affecting Inflation 
7. Data available for the first half of the year su ggest an ongoing moderation in the 
economic activity. During the first four months, in dustrial production was nearly 
unchanged from the last quarter in 2007 on a season ally adjusted basis. 
8. The global credit crunch continues to restrain d omestic demand. The seasonally 
adjusted CNBC-e consumption index continued to decl ine during April and May. 
Domestic sales of automobiles and white goods and i mports of consumer goods also 
indicate a similar picture. The Committee emphasize d that the chemical production, 
which is sensitive to changes in domestic demand, f ell significantly in both monthly 
and annual terms between March and April. Moreover,  imports of consumer goods 
were down from the first-quarter average in April i n seasonally adjusted terms. 
9. The CNBC-e consumer confidence index, which has been falling since the last 
quarter of 2007, also remained weak in May. Moreove r, recent data indicate that real 
consumer loans further moderated in April and May. 
10. The Committee assessed that soaring food prices  and ongoing uncertainties continue 
to curb the domestic demand. Indicators from the Co nsumer Tendency Survey, 
especially on households’ willingness to purchase s emi-durable and durable goods, 
lend support for this assessment. 
11. Global and domestic uncertainties have been slo wing down the investment demand. 
The Committee noted that the number of newly establ ished firms has dropped over 
the first half of 2008, indicating an ongoing moder ation in business investment. 
12. Despite the positive outlook for external deman d, machinery-equipment production 
continued to flatten in April. The decline in domes tic sales of commercial vehicles 
during the first quarter accelerated in April and M ay, confirming the slowdown in 
investment demand. Imports of capital goods, which displayed a slowdown in the first 
quarter, further continued to moderate in April on a seasonally adjusted basis. 
13. After having remained flat in 2007 on the back of slowing construction activity, the 
production of nonmetallic minerals grew by an annua l rate of 6.9 percent during 
January-April 2008, making a positive contribution to industrial production. Although 
the first-quarter rise in construction employment s uggests a rebound over the 
previous year, tightening credit conditions and ong oing uncertainties are expected to 
put more pressure on the housing market. In fact, h ouseholds’ willingness to 
purchase a new house has been declining, as suggest ed by the Consumer Tendency 
Survey. 
14. Labor market conditions improved slightly durin g the first quarter, mainly driven by the 
manufacturing industry employment. In contrast, the  service-sector employment has slowed down further. Accordingly, the Committee ind icated that the recent trend in 
non-farm employment contain the unit labor costs an d consumer demand. 
15. External demand has remained relatively strong.  Seasonally adjusted figures indicate 
that external demand in April was stronger compared  to the first-quarter average. As 
suggested by the robust pace of exports and the mar ked slowdown in imports, net 
exports are expected to make a positive contributio n to economic growth during the 
second quarter of the year. 
16. In sum, recent readings on supply and demand co nditions have been largely in line 
with the predictions of the April Inflation Report.  Accordingly, aggregate demand 
conditions continue to support disinflation. 
 
  Monetary Policy and Risks 
17. The Committee reassessed the inflation outlook presented under three alternative 
scenarios in the April Inflation Report. Recently t here have been favorable 
developments in unprocessed food prices, while oil prices have followed a 
significantly higher course than the prices assumed  in the baseline scenario in the 
April Inflation Report. Consequently, inflation is expected to decelerate starting from 
the last quarter of the year, ending 2009 close to the 7.5 percent inflation target.  
18. The Committee emphasized that tighter credit co nditions and the weakening in 
consumer confidence have continued to moderate dome stic demand, hence 
supporting disinflation. Relatively moderate pace o f inflation in services excluding 
transport and catering—items sensitive to food and energy price developments—
support this view. Nevertheless, persisting supply side shocks continue to delay 
disinflation, having adverse effects on inflation e xpectations. In this respect, monetary 
tightening exercised in May and June should be perc eived as an attempt to 
coordinate inflation expectations around the revise d targets and thus to prevent the 
materialization of second round effects. Adverse im pacts of the supply side shocks on 
the economy will be more limited should the economi c agents align their expectations 
for the next three years with the target rates of 7 ,5 percent, 6.5 percent and 5.5 
percent, respectively. 
19. The Committee also assessed the liquidity proje ctions and the liquidity management 
strategy. Excess liquidity sterilized in the overni ght market has been shrinking in the 
second half of 2008 due to a reduction in the amoun t of FX purchased through 
regular auctions, fall in Treasury’s foreign debt r ollover ratio, and rising money 
demand. Accordingly, the Central Bank has provided the required liquidity into the 
system via repo auctions, targeting overnight inter est rates to materialize at levels 
close to Central Bank borrowing rate. Current proje ctions do not point to a permanent 
shortage in liquidity. Accordingly, overnight inter est rate in the money market will be targeted to stay close to the Central Bank borrowin g rate in the forthcoming period. 
Hence, Central Bank’s overnight borrowing rate will  continue to be the key policy rate. 
20. Main risks to the inflation outlook can be list ed as follows: 
21. Developments in oil prices continue to pose ris ks on inflation all over the world. The 
automatic adjustment mechanism in electricity tarif fs, to be launched soon, is likely to 
further increase the domestic energy prices. Consid ering the ongoing uncertainties 
regarding energy prices, the Central Bank will cont inue to provide the inflation outlook 
under alternative scenarios.  
22. The persistence of global inflationary pressure s is yet to be seen and the impact of 
ongoing difficulties in the financial system on the  overall economy still continues to be 
a major source of uncertainty. A protracted period of global uncertainty has been 
keeping risk appetite at low levels and leading to a slowdown in capital flows to 
emerging markets. The Committee once again emphasiz ed that monetary policy 
would not react to temporary fluctuations in financ ial markets, but will not hesitate to 
implement the necessary monetary tightening should the volatility in the financial 
markets translate into a generalized deterioration in the pricing behavior. 
23. In sum, the Committee stated that ongoing uncer tainties and supply side shocks 
continued to pose risks on inflation, and that the Central Bank would consider a 
further measured rate hike when needed, so as to pr event the potential second-round 
effects of such risk factors. Accordingly, upcoming  data related to inflation outlook will 
be monitored carefully. The extent and timing of a possible future rate hike will 
depend on developments in global markets, external demand, fiscal policy 
implementation, and other factors affecting the med ium term inflation outlook. 
24. Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not a sufficient condition for attaining price 
stability. The support from fiscal policy and struc tural reforms are also critical in this 
respect. Preserving the resilience of the economy, especially under current 
conditions, requires the continuation of fiscal dis cipline and structural reforms. In this 
respect, the European Union accession process and t he implementation of structural 
reforms remain to be of utmost importance. In parti cular, advances in structural 
reforms, which would improve the quality of fiscal discipline and enhance the 
productivity, are monitored closely with regard to their implications on macroeconomic 
and price stability. 
 