No: 2008 – 21 
14 August 2008 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: August 14, 2008 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has d ecided to keep policy 
rates unchanged as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 16.7 5 percent, and lending rate at 
20.25 percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate at 12.75 percent, lending rate at 23 .25 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week matu rity borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions at 19.25 percent. 
 
Recent readings indicate that domestic economic act ivity has continued to 
moderate. Ongoing problems in international credit markets and global economy 
continue to restrain the aggregate demand, while ea sing domestic uncertainties will 
support domestic demand. Moreover, oil prices have followed a significantly lower 
course than the levels assumed in the baseline scen ario in the July Inflation Report and 
other commodity prices also displayed a downward co urse, improving the near-term 
inflation outlook. Overall, inflation is expected t o fall gradually in the forthcoming period. 
Considering the monetary tightening since May, the Committee believes that the 
current level of the policy rate is supportive of d isinflation. Yet, prevailing risks regarding 
the price setting behavior and ongoing global uncer tainties require monetary policy to 
remain cautious and to be more responsive to incomi ng data. Future decisions on policy 
rates will depend on developments in global markets , external demand, fiscal policy 
implementation, and other factors affecting the med ium term inflation outlook. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance . 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
eight working days.  
 