No: 2008-33 
19 November 2008  
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: November 19, 2008 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has deci ded to lower the policy 
rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate is decreased  from 16.75 percent to 
16.25 percent, while lending rate is decreased from 19. 75 percent to 18.75 
percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing ra te between 4:00 p.m. – 
5:00 p.m. is decreased from 12.75 percent to 12.25 perce nt, while lending rate is 
decreased from 22.75 percent to 21.75 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturit y borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions is de creased from 18.75 
percent to 17.75 percent. 
Recent readings indicate a significant slowdown in domesti c economic activity. 
Ongoing problems in international credit markets and th e global economy will continue 
to restrain both the domestic and external demand for an extended period, limiting the 
pass-through from exchange rates to domestic prices. Besides,  the sharp decline in oil 
and other commodity prices will have a favorable impact  on disinflation. Accordingly, the 
Committee judges that inflation will display a more r apid fall than envisaged before. In 
this respect, the Committee has decided to lower the bor rowing rates by 50 basis 
points. Moreover, the margin between the lending and  borrowing rates was reduced by 
a further 50 basis points in order to contain the poten tial volatility in short term interest 
rates. 
The Committee has underscored the importance of maintai ning the smooth 
functioning of the financial system and the efficiency of  credit markets, and has thus 
decided to implement additional measures regarding the  foreign exchange liquidity. The 
Central Bank will continue to take the necessary measures t o contain the adverse 
effects of the global financial turmoil on the domestic economy, provided that they do 
not conflict with the price stability objective. Future policy decisions will largely depend 
on the developments in global markets and their reflect ions on the domestic markets. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
eight working days.  
 