  
No: 2008 –– –– 28  23 October 2008 
  
  
THE CBRT PRESS RELEASE ON LIMITS FOR THE FOREIGN EX CHANGE  
AND BANKNOTES MARKET TRANSACTIONS  
 
 
  
The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey has been  taking various measures 
in order to prevent the recent problems in the inte rnational credit markets from 
affecting the orderly flow of liquidity in our loca l financial markets.  
Within this framework, the Central Bank resumed its  intermediary role in the 
Foreign Exchange Deposit Market  within the Central Bank on 9 October 2008. 
Furthermore, considering the level of the banks’ ba lance sheet aggregates, 
transaction limits in the Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets  were revised as of 
14 October 2008 and set at USD 5.4 billion in total .   
As it is the market of the last resort, the  commission rates in the Foreign 
Exchange Deposit Market  have been set at exclusively high levels with a vi ew to 
encourage direct transactions among banks. Transact ion volumes are relatively low 
and market interest rates are set in accordance wit h demand and supply conditions in 
this market, which operates as planned. Interest ra tes for the transactions among 
banks have been declining in both USD and Euro tran sactions since 9 October 2008, 
when the intermediary activities in Foreign Exchange Deposit Market  were resumed.  
As a result of the transactions conducted in the af ore-mentioned market, the 
total debt balance became USD 193 million on 22 Oct ober 2008. This figure amounts 
to only 4 percent of the total limits. 
In the meantime, as announced to the public with th e press release on 
‘Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy for 2008 ’ dated 18 December 2007, banks are 
able to borrow foreign exchange in terms of USD and  Euro from the Central Bank 
through the Foreign Exchange Deposit Market , within the predetermined limits with 
one-week maturity. No bank has yet needed to borrow  through this facility from the 
Central Bank at the interest rates that had to be s et high within the scope of the 
Central Bank’s function as the lender of the last r esort.  Meanwhile, although there is no foreign exchange li quidity problem in the 
Turkish banking system, transaction limits of the Foreign Exchange and Banknotes 
Markets  will be doubled starting from 24 October 2008 for each institution and will 
reach USD 10.8 billion in total, in order to ensure  that the system meets its possible 
foreign exchange liquidity needs smoothly in the up coming months. 
  