No: 2008-04          14 February 2008 
                                                                                                
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: February 14, 2008 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, Mehmet 
Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) decided  to lower the policy rates 
as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate from 15.50  to 15.25 percent, and lending rate 
from 19.50 to 19.25 percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing ra te applied between 4:00 p.m. – 
5:00 p.m. from 11.50 to 11.25 percent, lending rate from 22.50 to 22.25 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity  borrowing facilities provided for 
primary dealers via repo transactions from 18.50 to 18.2 5 percent. 
 
Recent readings on economic activity suggest that the econom y continues to 
grow at a moderate pace. Weakened global credit conditi ons restrain domestic demand. 
Moreover, the expected slowdown in global economic activity  may lead to a reduction in 
the contribution of external demand to the economic gro wth in the medium term. 
Accordingly, aggregate demand conditions will continue t o support disinflation. In this 
context, inflation is expected to decelerate in the mediu m term despite risks from food 
and energy prices. 
The Committee underlined that the primary goal of t he Central Bank of Turkey 
(CBT) is to achieve price stability, and noted that mone tary policy remains restrictive 
even after the recent rate cuts. Although unprocessed food  prices may display 
temporary fluctuations, inflation excluding energy and food items is expected to remain 
close to 4 percent. Yet, ongoing uncertainties in the gl obal economy and the risks to the 
price setting behavior compel the CBT to be attentive to  the incoming information. 
Accordingly, the Committee will closely monitor the lag ged impacts of the recent rate 
cuts. Besides, the second round effects on the wage and pri ce setting behavior of 
elevated food and energy prices and of the developments in incomes policy will be 
watched closely. The timing of further easing will depe nd on developments regarding 
global market conditions, external demand, fiscal policy i mplementation, and other 
factors affecting the medium term inflation outlook. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
eight working days.  