SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: October 22, 2008 
 
  Inflation Developments  
1. Consumer prices increased by 0.45 percent in September , and annual inflation 
fell down to 11.13 percent mainly with the significant  easing in annual food 
price inflation. The contribution of food and energy prices to annual inflation 
declined to 7 percent in September. 
2. Deceleration in food prices became more pronounced in  September. Food 
inflation decreased by a cumulative 4.2 points in the  last two months to 11.07 
percent year-on-year. The decline in fresh fruit and v egetable prices, driven by 
higher production compared to a year ago, has led to f urther slowdown in 
unprocessed food prices. In addition, after a drought-dr iven persistent 
increase over the past twelve months, pulse prices finally  declined in 
September, which was another key driver of the downwar d trend in 
unprocessed food prices. 
3. Processed food prices fell by 0.29 percent, which is the  lowest September 
inflation for this sub-group in recent years, leading t o a substantial reduction in 
its annual inflation, as predicted in the previous Summ ary of the Monetary 
Policy Committee (the Committee) Meeting. In view of  higher agricultural 
production and lower international prices, the Committ ee reiterated that annual 
processed food inflation would continue to ease in the r emainder of the year. 
The Committee also noted, however, that inflation ma y display a modest and 
temporary rise in October due to volatile vegetable p rices. 
4. Energy price inflation dropped by 0.6 points in Se ptember to 26.79 percent 
year-on-year. Although world oil prices have plummete d recently and fuel 
prices have moderated, sharp increases in prices of solid fu els –21.22 percent 
in the last three months– curbed the downward trend in  energy price inflation. 
The hike in natural gas and electricity rates is expected to put upward 
pressure on energy prices in October, with a contribution  of 0.27 points to CPI 
inflation. 
5. The annual inflation in prices of goods excluding en ergy and food remained 
stable for the third consecutive month, at 4.17 percent.  In the clothing group, 
domestic and foreign demand conditions have limited inf lation. Prices of 
durable goods fell slightly in September after a steep  decline over the past two 
months, while the base effect drove the group’s annual inflation up by 1 
percentage point. Given the depreciation of the new T urkish lira (YTL) and the 
low base from the fourth quarter in 2007, the annual  inflation in prices of 
durable goods is expected to rise further in the final quarter. 6. Services inflation continued to increase on the back of  rising prices of 
transport and communication services. Lagged pass-through e ffects of former 
upswings in oil prices continued to put upward pressure on  prices of transport 
services via rising school bus rates. Meanwhile, the annual  rate of increase in 
prices for communication services went up to 9.10 percent d ue to surging 
fixed-line tariffs and mobile call rates. On the other  hand, annual rental 
inflation remained on a steady decline. 
7. CPI excluding energy, unprocessed food, tobacco and go ld (the H index), 
went slightly down year-on-year, while inflation mea sured by the I index, which 
further excludes processed food prices, increased by 0.2 per centage points. 
Recently, both indexes have risen at a slower pace in mo nthly seasonally 
adjusted terms compared to previous quarters, indicating a slowdown in the 
underlying inflation. 
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
8. Problems in international credit markets and in glob al economy have 
continued to put restrain on domestic economic activity. I n August, industrial 
production and manufacturing production dropped by 4 a nd 5.7 percent, 
respectively, from a year ago. Production went down in  almost all sub-
industries in August. Data on industrial production in Ju ly-August period and 
on the manufacturing industry tendency survey in Septem ber suggest that 
industrial production contracted in the third quarter. The weakening in 
domestic and foreign demand will continue to have an a dverse impact on the 
economic activity in the final quarter. In fact, motor vehicles, textiles and 
clothing exports in the first three weeks of October have  displayed a significant 
fall. Besides, Business Tendency Survey results regarding t hree-month ahead 
expectations for sales and stocks of final goods also support the outlook 
mentioned above. 
9. Private consumption spending was flat in the third q uarter, as suggested by 
the data on consumer loans, imports of consumer goods, consu mption and 
confidence indices, and domestic sales of automobiles and wh ite goods. The 
deepening global financial crisis indicates that credit con ditions may further 
tighten. In fact, consumer loan growth for the first th ree weeks of October 
confirms this picture. 
10. Private investment spending continued to slow down in the third quarter. July-
August average of both imports and production of machin ery-equipment, 
electric machinery and appliances and other non-metallic minerals was down 
from a quarter earlier. Meanwhile, domestic sales of he avy commercial 
vehicles and investment appetite in that industry have declined. In view of the global financial turmoil, private investment spending is expected to slow down 
in the fourth quarter. 
11. In the second quarter, the moderation in imports h ad been more significant 
than that in exports in real terms, resulting in a posi tive contribution from net 
exports to growth. With a similar trend in external t rade as well as increased 
tourism revenues, net exports are likely to continue to have a positive 
contribution to growth in the third quarter. The exp ected slowdown in the 
global economic activity, which led to a reduction in im port demand, especially 
in advanced economies, poses a threat to Turkey’s export p erformance for the 
upcoming period. Although the significantly increased sha re of exports to non-
EU member states and the US signals an increased potentia l for market 
expansion, export growth is likely to decelerate in the  coming months. 
Moreover, the softening in domestic demand and the dep reciation of the YTL 
will lead to a marked slowdown in imports in the fourt h quarter. Overall, 
imports are expected to slow down at a faster pace than exports, which will 
help net exports to support GDP growth. 
12. In sum, recent readings indicate a significant slowdow n in domestic economic 
activity. Ongoing problems in international credit mar kets and the global 
economy will continue to restrain both domestic and exte rnal demand. 
Accordingly, aggregate demand conditions will increasingl y support 
disinflation. 
Monetary Policy and Risks  
13. The meeting agenda included an assessment of the inf lation forecasts to 
appear in the October Inflation Report. The Committe e stated that inflationary 
impact of the recent exchange rate movements would be o ffset by the 
favorable outlook in food prices and the sharp decline i n oil prices. Therefore, 
medium term inflation forecasts did not change significan tly compared to the 
previous quarter.  
14. Inflation is expected to display a limited and tem porary rise in October due to 
volatile vegetable prices, yet continue to decline grad ually in the medium term. 
Accordingly, the Committee at this point does not envisi on a significant 
revision in medium term inflation forecasts. However, i t should be noted that 
the intensification of the financial market turmoil req uires caution in terms of 
both the monetary policy and the inflation outlook. I n this respect, the 
Committee decided to keep borrowing rates –the key poli cy rates– unchanged. 
15. On the other hand, the Committee decided to lowe r the lending rates by 50 
basis points in order to contain the potential volatili ty in the short-term interest 
rates. It was noted that, since overnight rates may move  towards the Central 
Bank lending rates during times of temporary liquidity  squeeze in the market, narrowing down the margin between Central Bank lendi ng and borrowing rates 
would reduce the uncertainty regarding the overnight rates. This margin will be 
narrowed further, the extent of which would depend o n liquidity developments. 
16. The meeting agenda also included an assessment of the  developments in the 
local foreign exchange markets. The Committee emphasized  the essence of a 
liquid foreign exchange market for a healthy financial  system, and stated that 
supporting the liquidity positions of the banks should be  the priority under 
current conditions.  The Committee also suggested that ra ising the transaction 
limits at the Foreign Exchange Deposit Markets would be helpful in this regard. 
It was also agreed that other measures could be implemen ted if needed. In 
this respect, it was noted that the Central Bank retains the option of 
conducting foreign exchange sales auctions or direct interv entions, should 
there be unhealthy price movements due to a loss of dep th in the foreign 
exchange markets. 
17. Looking ahead, credit conditions are expected to cont inue to tighten in the 
forthcoming period. Regarding the inflation outlook, these developments 
create upside risks through potential portfolio movement s in the short term, but 
downside risks through weaker aggregate demand in the me dium term. Given 
the uncertainty surrounding the global economic outlook,  monetary policy 
needs to be flexible on either side. Therefore, futur e monetary policy decisions 
will depend on the impact of the ongoing global fina ncial turmoil on the 
domestic economy. 
18. Commodity prices continue to be volatile, creating risks to the inflation outlook. 
Despite the downward revision in projections for food a nd energy prices, our 
main scenario is still based on quite conservative assumptio ns, implying that 
the risks are on both sides. Should the upside risks materia lize, monetary 
policy will be conducted so as to minimize deviations fro m the targets. 
Downward surprises in food and energy prices, on the oth er hand, will be 
perceived as an opportunity to bring inflation down a t a faster pace than 
implied by our medium term targets. 
19. Finally, a critical underlying assumption for the i nflation and monetary policy 
outlook outlined above is that government expenditure s and incomes policy 
will evolve in line with the official projections, and  that there will be no further 
increases in indirect taxes or administered price adjustmen ts, except those 
required by the automatic pricing mechanisms in place. In  particular, this 
means any needed tightening in the fiscal balance would  occur largely through 
expenditure cuts rather than higher excise taxes. Any de viation from this 
framework may lead to a revision of the outlook for in flation and monetary 
policy. 20. The Central Bank will continue to take the necessary measures to contain the 
adverse effects of the global financial turmoil on the domestic economy. 
Future policy decisions will largely depend on the deve lopments in global 
markets and their reflections on the global financial ma rkets. 
21. Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not sufficien t to maintain the 
resilience of the economy against the global financial t urmoil. Preserving the 
fiscal discipline and strengthening the structural reform agenda would also 
help to mitigate the adverse effects of the ongoing sho cks on the domestic 
economy. In this respect, the European Union accession proce ss and the 
implementation of structural reforms envisaged in the e conomic program 
remain to be of utmost importance. In particular, adva nces in structural 
reforms, which would improve the quality of fiscal discip line and enhance 
productivity gains, are monitored closely by the CBT wi th regard to their 
implications on macroeconomic and price stability. 