No: 2008 – 35 
01 December 2008   
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: November 19, 2008 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices increased by 2.60 percent in October, p ushing annual 
inflation up to 11.99 percent, mainly on account of th e temporary rise in 
vegetable prices. The plunge in world oil prices helped to ease fuel prices, but 
the increase in electricity, natural gas and solid fuel p rices put further upward 
pressure on energy price inflation. The contribution of  food and energy prices 
to annual inflation went up to 7.6 percentage points,  while annual services 
inflation declined. 
2. The sharp increase in unprocessed food prices in October drove food prices 
up by 3.91 percent on the back of soaring fresh fruit an d vegetable prices that 
were up around 30 percent. Accordingly, the increase in fresh fruit and 
vegetable prices accounted for 1.7 percentage points of th e 2.6 percent rise in 
monthly CPI. Annual processed food inflation, on the o ther hand, fell by a 
cumulative 6.2 percentage points in three months. The do wntrend in 
processed food inflation is expected to continue into comin g months on the 
back of favorable prices for bread and grains and solid an d liquid fats.   
3. Although fuel prices dropped by 2.35 percent, energ y price inflation climbed to 
30.98 percent year-on-year in October amid rising elect ricity, natural gas and 
solid fuel prices. Electricity prices have soared by a cumula tive 56 percent 
since the beginning of the year, while solid fuel price s have jumped by 31.5 
percent in four months. Price cuts of 15 and 10.3 percent  on liquid petroleum 
gas and bottled gas, respectively, are expected to curb the  impact of the 
natural gas price hike of 22.5 percent in early November  on CPI inflation. In 
view of these developments and the base effect, annual en ergy inflation is 
expected to fall in November. 
4. Prices of goods excluding energy and food rose by 1 pe rcentage point to 5.17 
percent year-on-year in October. In the clothing group , annual inflation 
remained low, while in the durables group (excl. gold)  inflation went up due to 
the base effect and the exchange rate developments. Given the exchange rate 
pass-through and the low base from a year ago, the ann ual inflation in durable 
goods is expected to rise further in November. 5. Annual inflation in services, which had been on the r ise since March, 
moderated in October with the easing supply shocks and the  weakening of 
domestic demand. Accordingly, annual services inflation was down by 0.5 
percentage points to 10.97 percent in October. In fact, inflation in all services 
categories declined in October. Recently, seasonally adjust ed core inflation 
indicators also point to a slowdown in underlying infla tion.  
 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. The adverse impact of the global financial crisis on th e Turkish economy has 
become more visible. Recent information points to a pron ounced slowdown in 
domestic economic activity. Industrial production fell by 5 .5 percent in 
September from a year earlier. Third quarter industr ial production dropped by 
2.1 percent in annual terms and 3.5 percent quarter-on -quarter in seasonally 
adjusted terms. This outcome was mainly driven by the decl ine in the activities 
of export-oriented industries. 
7. Leading indicators suggest that industrial production will continue to weaken in 
the fourth quarter. In October, the capacity utilizati on in manufacturing industry 
fell to 76.7 percent, down by 6.4 percentage points fr om a year ago. Similarly, 
the Business Tendency Survey in October showed that new or ders in the 
manufacturing industry for the next three months and exp ected production 
have declined sharply.  
8. After having remained flat in the third quarter, private consumption spending 
will fall markedly in the fourth quarter, as suggested by recent indicators. 
Domestic sales of automobiles dropped in October while con sumer loans fell 
in real terms from a month ago. In addition, expectati ons for domestic sales in 
the next three months have fallen remarkably, and consume r confidence 
indices displayed a sharp decline on the back of global eco nomic concerns. 
9. Leading indicators suggest that the investment spending  continued to slow 
down in the third quarter. In seasonally adjusted term s, both production and 
imports in the machinery-equipment industry and the el ectric machinery and 
appliances industry fell in the third quarter. Likewise,  domestic sales of heavy 
commercial vehicles continued to decline in October. Import s of capital goods, 
on the other hand, grew at a modest pace in the third  quarter on a seasonally 
adjusted basis. Yet, the recent depreciation in domestic cu rrency will likely to 
curb the investment demand in the fourth quarter. Mean while, medium term 
investment sentiment of the industrial sector continued to  weaken, as 
suggested by the results of October’s Business Tendency Survey . In view of 
these developments, private investment spending on machiner y-equipment is 
expected to weaken further in the third and fourth qua rters. Besides, recent indicators also point to a marked decline in construction a ctivities in the 
second half of the year. 
10. Due to the sharp global economic downturn, Turkey’s export market share has 
fallen markedly. Exports displayed a year-on-year fall by 3.1 percent in 
September. Although the increased share of exports to no n-EU and US 
countries signals a potential for market expansion, Turkey’ s export 
performance in the near term is likely to be weaker comp ared to previous 
years. Given the expectations for export orders in the comi ng three months 
and rates of capacity utilization in export-oriented in dustries in October, export 
volume is expected to fall in the final quarter. Moreove r, the softening in 
domestic demand and the depreciation of the YTL will l ead to a marked 
slowdown in imports in the fourth quarter. Overall, im ports are expected to 
decline at a slightly faster pace than exports, which will  lead to a positive 
contribution from net exports to GDP growth. 
11. In sum, recent readings indicate that the economic act ivity continued to 
weaken in the third quarter. Due to tighter credit con ditions and the 
deterioration in consumer and investor confidence, domesti c demand will 
continue to fall in the fourth quarter. Accordingly, a ggregate demand 
conditions will increasingly support disinflation. 
 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
12. The meeting focused on the developments since the pub lication of the 
October Inflation Report. The Committee stated that o ngoing problems in 
international credit markets and the global economy wou ld continue to restrain 
both domestic and external demand for an extended perio d 
13. The Committee members expect the pass-through from e xchange rates to 
domestic inflation to remain low in the current period  compared to the past 
episodes. The Inflation Report involved no major revision  in the medium term 
inflation forecasts, as the impact of the pass-through fro m the exchange rate 
depreciation to inflation was expected to be largely of fset by the favorable food 
and energy prices and the weakening demand. Recently, w eaker-than-
expected economic activity has reinforced the Committee’s vie w that the pass-
through would remain muted.  
14. The Committee has reiterated that the sharp declin e in oil and other 
commodity prices would have a favorable impact on disinfla tion. Recently, 
import prices have been easing due to ongoing weakness in global economic 
activity. Therefore, domestic prices of imported goods are  not expected to 
display a significant rise, notwithstanding the depreciat ion in the nominal exchange rate. This should be another factor limiting th e exchange rate pass-
through.  
15. In sum, considering the recent data, the Committee has judged that inflation 
would display a more rapid fall than envisaged before.  The Committee 
members have stated that although some pass-through from exchange rates 
to certain core inflation measures is unavoidable, this sho uld be seen as a 
change in relative prices rather than a rise in underlyi ng inflation. Given that 
medium term inflation outlook is mainly driven by suppl y and demand 
conditions, inflation should trend downwards in the for thcoming period.   
16. The Committee underscored the need to remain cauti ous in monetary policy 
decisions to ensure a sustained fall in inflation. On the  other hand, the 
Committee members have indicated that recently domestic f inancial conditions 
have been tighter than required by the current stance o f monetary policy, 
owing mainly to the intensification of global financia l crisis. In this context, it 
was stated that a measured rate cut would partially off set the extra tightening 
in monetary conditions.  
17. Based on these assessments, the Committee has decided to  lower the 
borrowing rates by 50 basis points. Moreover, the margin  between the lending 
and borrowing rates was reduced by a further 50 basis po ints in order to 
contain the potential volatility in short term interest  rates. 
18. The Committee has underscored the importance of mai ntaining the smooth 
functioning of the financial system and the efficiency of  credit markets, and 
has thus decided to implement additional measures regard ing the foreign 
exchange liquidity. As a lender of last resort, the Cent ral Bank has at its 
disposal the tools necessary to manage the Turkish Lira liq uidity directly, and 
therefore is able to supply the required liquidity to  support the smooth 
functioning of financial and credit markets. Foreign excha nge liquidity 
conditions, on the other hand, are largely determined  by global factors. 
Accordingly, considering the existing level of uncertainty in the global 
economy, the Committee members have underlined the imp ortance of utilizing 
the foreign exchange reserves primarily to support the fo reign exchange 
liquidity of the banking system, in line with the plan  announced on October the 
30 th .     
19. Central Bank will continue to take the necessary measu res to contain the 
adverse effects of the global financial turmoil on the d omestic economy, 
provided that they do not conflict with the price stabil ity objective. Future policy 
decisions will largely depend on the developments in glo bal markets and their 
reflections on the domestic economy. It should be emphasiz ed that monetary 
policy needs to remain flexible, and sensitive to new dat a and developments. 20. Central government budgetary outturns were in lin e with the targets in the first 
three quarters of the year. The slowdown in economic act ivity will moderate 
tax revenues, and hence create downside risks on budgetary r evenues. 
Inflation outlook presented above assumes that the fall i n energy prices will be 
fully passed through domestic energy prices. In this context , it is important that 
any needed tightening in the fiscal balance would be i mplemented through 
expenditure cuts rather than higher excise taxes. The Commi ttee emphasized 
that outlook for inflation and monetary policy may be  affected by the deviations 
from this framework. 
21. Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not sufficien t to maintain the 
resilience of the economy against the global financial t urmoil. Preserving the 
fiscal discipline and strengthening the structural reform agenda would also 
help to mitigate the adverse effects of the ongoing shocks on the domestic 
economy. In this respect, the European Union accession proce ss and the 
implementation of structural reforms envisaged in the eco nomic program 
remain to be of utmost importance. In particular, advan ces in structural 
reforms, which would improve the quality of fiscal discipl ine and enhance 
productivity gains, are monitored closely by the CBT wit h regard to their 
implications on macroeconomic and price stability. 