No: 2008 - 25 
October 9, 2008 
 
THE CENTRAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY 
PRESS RELEASE ON THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE DEPOSIT MARKE T   
 
As known, the Central Bank used to act as intermedi ary in various foreign 
exchange transactions performed among authorized ba nks while it could also carry 
out transactions in concordance with policy targets  in the Foreign Exchange and 
Banknotes Market established within the Bank in 198 8. The foreign exchange deposit 
market was one of the markets where the Central Ban k executed its intermediary 
functions. However, as explained under “V. Arrangem ents For The Operational 
Framework Of Monetary And Foreign Exchange Policies ” of the Bank’s Press 
Release on “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Polic y in 2002 and Prospective 
Developments” dated January 2, 2002 and no. 2002-1,  the role of the Bank in foreign 
exchange markets was restructured in a way to condu ct and communicate exchange 
rate policies better to fulfill its primary objecti ve of achieving and maintaining price 
stability and borrowing limits for the transactions  exclusively among banks were 
phased out in 2002. The Central Bank’s gradual phas ing out of its intermediary 
functions in the Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Mar kets foreign exchange deposit 
market that started in July 2002 was completed as o f December 2, 2002.  
The recent problems in global credit markets accomp anied with concerns on 
credibility of the global financial sector have led  to liquidity crunch in money markets 
of developed countries. The institutions in charge of eliminating the problems in these 
markets and facilitating the smooth performance of the actions are the central banks 
of the relevant countries. Currently, central banks  are in an effort to eliminate the 
shortage in their own money markets through liquidi ty operations. However, such an 
atmosphere of uncertainty occasionally brings about  a decline in the mobilization of 
foreign exchange liquidity. Therefore, it has been decided that the Central Bank 
should resume its activities as an intermediary in the foreign exchange deposit 
markets in Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets a s of today until the 
uncertainties are eliminated in the international m arkets in a view to contributing to 
the enhancement of the mobilization of foreign exch ange liquidity in the Interbank 
Foreign Exchange Market. In this context, banks shall be able to borrow and lend in the foreign exchange 
deposit market through the intermediation of the Ce ntral Bank in accordance with the 
rules set by the Implementation Instructions for  the Interbank Money Market. 
Guidelines for the  operation of the Foreign Exchange Deposit Market ar e available in 
the Annex.  
 
 ANNEX: Guidelines for the Operation of the Foreign Exchange Deposit 
Market: 
 
1- All banks that are the members of the Interbank Foreign Exchange 
Market shall be eligible to make transactions in th e Foreign 
Exchange Deposit Market. 
2- Transaction limits for the Banks shall be those introduced to them at 
the Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets. 
3- Banks shall perform foreign exchange deposit tra nsactions against 
collateral. The assets eligible as collaterals are the followings: 
i. Foreign banknotes  deposits of the banks at Ankara, İstanbul 
and İzmir Branches of the Central Bank, 
ii. Bills and bonds, the maturity structures and fe atures of which 
are evaluated and accepted by the Central Bank and issued 
to foreign states and treasuries, Eurobonds issued by the 
Undersecretariat of Treasury, 
iii. Government Domestic Debt Securities issued by the 
Undersecretariat of Treasury, 
iv. Central Bank liquidity bills. 
4- Banks shall take into account the excess portion  stated below 
according to the groups and tranches determined for  themselves and 
deposit collateral in the Foreign Exchange and Bank notes Markets 
accordingly. 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Collateral Types Tranche 1 Tranche 2  
 Tranche 3 
Foreign Banknotes Deposits 10  11  12  
Bills and Bonds Issued by Foreign  States  17  20  23  
Eurobonds 20  25  30  
G.Securities / GDDS< 1 YEAR 
(YTL, FX AND FX-INDEXED)  20  25  30  
G.Securities / GDDS > 1 YEAR 
(YTL, FX AND FX-INDEXED)  30  35  40  
Liquidity Bills 20  25  30  5- In the event of a change in the value of the col laterals provided by 
banks in return for their borrowings due to reasons  such as price and 
exchange rate movements; banks, whose collaterals d o not fully 
cover their borrowings, may be asked to provide add itional collateral. 
Any failure to fulfill this obligation within the s pecified time shall be 
deemed as a default and transactions of such banks shall be subject 
to the rules and principles applicable to default c ases.   
6- USD and Euro deposit transactions shall be condu cted between 
10:00 a.m.-12:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m.-3:30 p.m.  
7- Transactions with the same value date shall be c onducted until  
12:00 a.m. for Euro and 3:00 p.m. for US dollar.  
8- Banks shall submit their bids and offers via the  telephone lines        
(0 312 3091966-89) of the Foreign Exchange and Bank notes 
Markets Division.  
9- The minimum transaction limit is USD 1 million a nd Euro 1 million. 
Transactions shall be conducted in terms of 1 milli on and multiples.  
10- Transactions may be conducted with same day, 1- day and spot 
value dates with maturities from 1 week to 1 month.  
11- The fractional part of the interest rates for t he bids and offers will, on 
a yearly basis, be whole, a half (1/2), a quarter ( 1/4) or one-eighth 
(1/8) and any fractional numbers other than these w ill not be allowed. 
One year will be equivalent to 360 days in the matu rity subject to 
interest. 
12- The Banks shall state whether their offers or b ids are dividable. The 
dividable offers or bids may be partially matched.     
13- The eligible three bids and offers will be post ed on the “CBTJ” page 
of the Reuters system for the purpose of informing all banks 
concurrently. The matched transactions will be anno unced on the 
same page. The Central Bank will be the addressee w ith regard to 
the transactions.  The Central Bank will be the bli nd broker for these 
transactions, in other words, the trading instituti ons will not know one 
another.  
14- The bids and offers that did not match by the e nd of the day will be 
canceled. 15- Banks shall confirm their transactions until 4: 30 p.m. on the same 
day. Otherwise, the Central Bank records will be bi nding in case of 
dispute. 
16- A commission of ten percent (0.10) of the YTL-e quivalent of the 
accrued interest, calculated by using the reference  buying exchange 
rates announced by the CBT on the previous working day will be 
collected from both the borrowing and lending parti es for finalized 
deposit transactions. This amount shall not be less  than 1 ten 
thousandth of the YTL-equivalent of the principal a mount calculated 
likewise. 
17- The amount lent by the banks in the FX deposit market shall not be 
deemed foreign currency required reserves.  
18- The banks that fail to fulfill their obligation s will be subject to 
sanctions specified in the Implementation Instructi ons of the Foreign 
Exchange and Banknotes Markets. 
 
 