No: 2008 – 18 
17 July 2008 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: July 17, 2008 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah 
Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has deci ded to adjust the policy 
rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate is increased from 16.25 percent to 
16.75 percent, while lending rate is left unchanged at  20.25 percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing ra te between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 
p.m. is increased from 12.25 percent to 12.75 percent, w hile lending rate is left 
unchanged at 23.25, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity  borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions is left  unchanged at 19.25. 
 
Recent readings on the supply and demand conditions are largely in line with the 
predictions of the April Inflation Report. Difficultie s in international credit markets continue 
to restrain the domestic demand, while external demand displays a relatively strong course. 
Overall, aggregate demand conditions support disinflatio n. The Committee also finds it 
worthwhile to mention that the hikes in electricity rat es and the last year’s low base will lead 
to a significant but temporary rise in annual inflatio n in July. 
The Committee notes that recently there have been favor able developments in 
unprocessed food prices, while oil prices have followed a si gnificantly higher course than 
the prices assumed in the baseline scenario in the April I nflation Report. Consequently, 
inflation is expected to stay at elevated levels for a shor t period before gradually 
moderating towards the 7.5 percent target by the end of 2009. Adverse impacts of the 
supply side shocks on the economy will be more limited shou ld the economic agents align 
their expectations for the next three years with the tar get rates of 7.5 percent, 6.5 percent 
and 5.5 percent, respectively. 
Given the monetary tightening since May, the Committee  believes that the current 
level of the policy rate is supportive of disinflation. Y et, ongoing uncertainties and supply 
side shocks continue to pose risks on inflation. The Central Bank will consider a further 
measured rate hike when needed, so as to prevent the pot ential second-round effects of 
such risk factors. The timing  of a possible future rate hike will depend on developm ents in 
global markets, external demand, fiscal policy implementa tion, and other factors affecting 
the medium term inflation outlook. 
Considering the changing liquidity conditions, the Comm ittee has also decided to 
reduce the margin between the borrowing and the lend ing rates by 50 basis points. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
eight working days.  