Central Bank of Turkey
No:2008-14

Ankara, June 3, 2008

Mehmet ŞİMŞEK
Minister of State
ANKARA
The State Planning Organization has inquired with the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT),
through an official letter dated 22 May 2008, that there is a need to determine the inflation
path within the framework of the “Medium Term Program”. Inflation figures that will appear in
the Program are also going to be used as official inflation targets during the 2009-2011
budget preparations. In accordance with Article 42 of the Central Bank Law, inflation targets
are to be determined jointly with the Government. This open letter extends our proposal for
setting the official inflation targets throughout the years 2009 to 2011.
Recent studies have been increasingly supporting the view that rising food and energy
prices may reflect a structural change in global economic environment rather than
temporary cyclical factors. Projections made by the international institutions also suggest
that food and energy prices may continue to follow an unfavorable course in the forthcoming
period.
In the open latter dated April 30, 2008 we have already stated that reaching the 4
percent target could take more time than originally envisaged. Related to this issue, the April
Inflation Report presented three different projections constructed under alternative
scenarios.
Our main policy document, published in December 2005 on the general framework of
the inflation targeting regime, stated that inflation targets would be changed only if inflation
was expected to stay away from the target for a considerably long period of time due to
factors beyond the control of the monetary policy and consequently official inflation targets
ceased to be an anchor. Our assessments based on recent developments suggest that,
even under the maintenance of a cautious policy stance, reaching the 4 percent target is
likely to take an extended period. Under these conditions, a revision in inflation targets has
become a technical necessity.
In fact, the Summary of the April 2008 Monetary Policy Committee Meeting has
included the following paragraph:
‘Since inflation is seen above the medium term target for a considerable period, the meeting
agenda also covered the issue of target revision. Committee members indicated that changing the
target for end-2008 would not be appropriate, since doing so would be a clear violation of the
accountability principle in practice. Regarding targets for 2009 and afterwards, the Committee
assessed that, given the uncertainty surrounding the food and energy prices as well as the global
economy, it would be wiser to reconsider the issue towards the end of this year in tandem with the
budget preparations. Accordingly, we envisage a framework in which forecasts serve as intermediate
anchors while the medium term is anchored by the 4 percent target. The Committee therefore noted
that extending the forecast horizon in the Inflation Report to three years would enhance the efficiency
of the overall strategy of monetary policy.’

1

Central Bank of Turkey

Medium Term Inflation Targets
Food and energy prices continue to pose risks to the medium term inflation outlook
and there is no clear evidence that this trend will reverse in the short term. Under these
circumstances, we think that it would be appropriate to factor in the possibility of further
supply side shocks; and thus to design the target path so as to minimize the risk of a second
revision in the inflation target path. Accordingly, we envisage a target path with a more
gradual convergence towards 4 percent inflation.
Considering these assessments together with the three alternative projections
presented in the April Inflation Report, we propose to revise the targets for 2009 and 2010 to
7.5 and 6.5 percent, respectively; and to set the target for the year 2011 at 5.5 percent.
Upward revision in the target path does not necessarily mean that monetary policy will
be looser in the forthcoming period. On the contrary, our forecasts presented in the April
Inflation Report are based on a tighter monetary policy stance than earlier envisaged,
indicating the maintenance of a cautious policy for an extended period.
The CBT will treat the revised targets asymmetrically in order to contain the inflation
expectations. In this respect monetary policy will aim to keep inflation below the revised
target path, by staying close to the baseline forecasts presented in the April Inflation Report.
Accordingly, better than expected outcomes in food and energy prices or in other global
factors will be perceived as an opportunity to bring down inflation faster than that is implied
by the revised target path. Should the upside risks materialize; monetary policy will be
conducted so as to minimize the deviation of inflation from the revised targets.
Recent research conducted by the CBT staff on the formation of inflation expectations
shows that the weight attached by economic agents to past inflation has recently been
increasing, suggesting that the current inflation target has become a weaker anchor in
shaping inflation expectations. Breaching the targets by a large margin since 2006 may
explain this behavioral change in inflation expectations formation process. If the past
inflation becomes a reference point in the wage and price setting process, this could
increase the costs associated with disinflation. Revising the target path by incorporating the
impact of the prolonged shocks will also help to re-anchor inflation expectations.
The Target and Accountability for Year 2008
According to Article 42 of the Central Bank Law, breaching the target by a significant
margin requires the CBT to write an open letter to the Government, explaining the reasons
for the breach and the measures to be taken to ensure that inflation rate will return to levels
within pre-established limits. This framework facilitates the implementation of the
accountability principle, which is one of the fundamental principles of the inflation targeting
regime.
Changing the target for the year 2008 – a relatively short period compared to the long
monetary transmission horizon – would in practice be equivalent to violating the
accountability principle. A challenging but more beneficial approach is to keep the target and

2

Central Bank of Turkey
explain the reasons for missing the target. Accordingly, we believe that, for accountability
purposes, it is more appropriate to keep the original target path for the year 2008, which
was announced through the main policy document published at the end of 2007. Given that
our inflation reports provide an extensive account for the inflation developments, focusing
more on inflation reports for the rest of the year will facilitate the communication of monetary
policy. In this context, open letters that are likely to be written for the rest of the year will be
shorter and refer largely to the corresponding inflation reports.
Conclusion
Inflation targets have been breached by a significant margin in the past two years as a
result of exceptionally persistent supply shocks and there is a considerable chance that,
contrary to the initial views, the impact of these shocks will continue for a prolonged period.
Besides, the ongoing uncertainty resulting from the global economy has been increasing the
risks on the inflation outlook. Our revised projections incorporating the latest developments
suggest that it will take a relatively long time for inflation to reach 4 percent level. Even more
importantly, current inflation target no longer seems to serve as a nominal anchor in the
short term. Therefore, we would like to extend a proposal to your consideration to revise the
targets for 2009 and 2010 to 7.5 and 6.5 percent, respectively; and to set the target for the
year 2011 at 5.5 percent.
Yours Sincerely,

CENTRAL BANK OF TURKEY
Head Office

Durmuş Yılmaz
Governor

3

Erdem Başçı
Deputy Governor

