No: 2008 – 38 
December 18, 2008 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: December 18, 2008 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has d ecided to lower the policy 
rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate is decr eased from 16.25 percent to 
15 percent, while lending rate is decreased from 18 .75 percent to 17.50 percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate between 4:00 p.m. – 
5:00 p.m. is decreased from 12.25 percent to 11 per cent, while lending rate is 
decreased from 21.75 percent to 20.50 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week matu rity borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions is decreased from 17.75 
percent to 16.50 percent. 
Recent readings indicate that the slowdown in the d omestic economic activity 
has intensified. Ongoing problems in international credit markets and the global 
economy are expected to continue to restrain both t he domestic and external demand 
for an extended period, putting downward pressure o n inflation. Moreover, the 
developments in oil and other commodity prices are having a favorable impact on 
disinflation. Looking ahead, the Committee has judg ed that inflation will display a rapid 
fall in the forthcoming period. Accordingly, the Co mmittee has decided to lower short-
term interest rates by 125 basis points. 
Uncertainties regarding the impact of the problems in financial markets on the 
real economy remain at high levels. The Central Ban k will continue to take the 
necessary measures to contain the adverse effects o f the global financial turmoil on the 
domestic economy, provided that they do not conflic t with the price stability objective. 
The extent and the timing of the next rate cut will  depend on the factors affecting 
inflation outlook. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance . 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
eight working days.  
 