No: 2008-24 
29 September 2008 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: September 18, 2008 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices fell by 0.24 percent in August, bring ing inflation down to 
11.77 percent year-on-year, largely owing to a reduct ion in annual food price 
inflation. Despite the fall in fuel prices, hikes in nat ural gas and water rates 
increased annual energy price inflation. The contributi on of food and energy 
prices to annual inflation was down by 0.5 points from July to 7.7 percent in 
August.  
2. The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) assesse d that favorable 
outlook in food prices and the sharp decline in oil price s will support 
disinflation. 
3. The annual rate of increase in food and non-alcohol ic beverage prices 
decelerated by 2 percentage points to 13.33 percent. Wi th the ongoing 
correction in fruit and vegetable prices, annual inflati on in unprocessed food 
prices slowed down to 0.68 percent in August. The favorab le trend in 
unprocessed food prices is expected to continue in the forth coming period. 
4. The relative slowdown in processed food prices has become  more significant 
in August. Recent decline in prices of bread and grains a s well as oil and fats 
has been supporting the downward trend in processed food  inflation. Given 
the downward trend in processed food prices and the low base from last year, 
annual inflation in processed food prices is expected to ea se markedly in 
September. 
5. The Committee observed that, since the release of the  latest Inflation Report, 
food prices have been following a more favorable course t han envisaged, 
thanks to improved agricultural productivity and lower in ternational prices. 
Food inflation is expected to continue to ease in the re mainder of the year. 
6. Energy price inflation climbed up to an annual rat e of 27.38 percent. Despite 
the recent fall in oil prices, the cumulative past increase s continue to put 
upward pressure on energy prices. The hike in prices of na tural gas, water and 
solid fuels in August is a case in point. Moreover, the im pending hike in 
electricity tariffs, effective October 1, and the potenti al rise in natural gas 
prices indicate that energy prices will continue to restra in the disinflation in the short term. The hike in electricity tariffs is likely to co ntribute 0.23 percentage 
points to CPI inflation in October. 
7. The annual inflation in prices of goods excluding ene rgy and food remained 
unchanged from July, at 4.19 percent. Seasonal discounts i n August were 
relatively limited compared to July, pushing clothing pr ice inflation up by 1.2 
percentage points year-on-year. On the other hand, th e strengthening of the 
new Turkish lira and the weak domestic demand brought an nual inflation in 
durable goods down by 1.6 percentage points from July. Meanwhile, prices of 
pharmaceuticals rose by 4.64 percent, while gold prices we re down 11.05 
percent in August. 
8. On the services front, lagged impacts of supply shocks conti nued to put 
upward pressure on prices of transport and catering services.  Nevertheless, 
the Committee noted that the monthly rate of increase  in catering prices have 
recently slowed down, which should become more pronounced  as food prices 
ease further. Inflation in communication services, which we re up 4 percentage 
points year-on-year on account of the base effect and soa ring fixed-line tariffs, 
were the main driver of the rise in annual services infla tion in August. Rental 
inflation, on the other hand, remained on a steady d ecline. 
9. Although the inflation measured by the widely cite d core CPI indexes, denoted 
by H and I, went slightly up year-on-year due to the  base effect and the lagged 
impact of supply shocks, seasonally adjusted figures suggest a downward 
trend in underlying inflation.  
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
10. Recent readings indicate a significant slowdown in do mestic economic activity. 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew by 1.9 percent in the se cond quarter of 
2008 in annual terms, but displayed a 0.6 percent quar terly decline in 
seasonally adjusted terms. Net exports made a positive, tho ugh modest, 
contribution to growth, whereas private consumption and investment 
expenditures slowed down significantly. 
11. Tightening global liquidity conditions and modera ting domestic and foreign 
demand have put restrain on the industrial production. Seasonally adjusted 
data suggest that industrial production remained flat i n July compared with the 
previous quarter, and the sharp downturn in industry cap acity utilization rate in 
August points an ongoing slowdown in industrial producti on. 
12. The uncertainty surrounding the global economy incr eased the downside risks 
to foreign demand. Capacity utilization rates in indu stries such as textiles, 
clothing, vehicles and machinery-equipment, which account f or a substantial share in exports, declined in August, indicating a lower contribution from 
external demand to economic growth. On the other hand,  the robust demand 
from oil exporting countries continues to support external  demand. 
13. The fall in agricultural production in the second q uarter is believed to be short-
lived since it has been partly driven by regional drough t problems. In fact, crop 
production forecasts for 2008, recently released by the T URKSTAT, point to a 
rising agricultural production in the second half of the  year. 
14. Leading indicators for the third quarter point to  sluggish recovery in private 
consumption expenditure. Although consumer confidence indi ces have 
rebounded to some extent, they are still at low levels co mpared with the 
episodes of vigorous domestic demand. Monetary indicators, consumer loans, 
consumption indices and the Business Tendency Survey data sug gest a 
similar outlook. 
15. Recent readings indicate that investment expenditure have followed a flat 
course in the third quarter. Indicators such as machinery-e quipment 
production, imports of capital goods and sales of heavy com mercial vehicles, 
point to a continued softening in machinery-equipment investments. July data 
on production in the non-metallic minerals industry, a leading indicator for 
construction investments, are slightly up from June in season ally adjusted 
terms, but down from the first-quarter average. In add ition, building permits fell 
by 20.1 percent year-on-year in the second quarter. Th e steady decline in 
building permits since mid-2007 indicates that construction  activities are 
unlikely to rebound in the upcoming period.  
16. Public expenditures registered a fall in the first h alf of 2008 in annual terms. 
Public spending is expected to accelerate in the second half  of the year, in line 
with budgetary targets. This will partly offset the slo wdown in private 
expenditures, and hence, support the aggregate demand. 
17. Overall, ongoing problems in international credit markets and the global 
economy continue to restrain both the domestic and extern al demand. 
Therefore aggregate demand conditions will continue to  support disinflation. 
Accordingly, inflation is expected to fall gradually in the forthcoming period. 
 
  Monetary Policy and Risks 
18. The Committee assessed that the current policy rate su pports disinflation. 
Moreover, the decline in the global risk appetite has be en keeping longer-term 
interest rates at high levels and leading to tighter mo netary conditions. 19. Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) has been presenting th e inflation outlook under 
alternative scenarios for food and energy prices since the second quarter of 
the year. This framework should improve the predictabili ty of monetary policy 
by providing conditional forecasts for different realiza tions of shocks. As a 
mater of fact, developments since the publication of July Inflation Report have 
confirmed the relevance of this strategy. Oil prices have f ollowed a 
significantly lower course than the level assumed in the b aseline scenario.  
Similarly, recent developments in agricultural commodity  prices and in 
domestic agricultural production indicate a more favorabl e outlook for food 
prices than envisaged in the Inflation Report.  According ly, the Committee 
assessed that the course of oil and food prices has been close r to the 
optimistic scenario outlined in the July Inflation Repor t, and therefore, a 
measured rate cut would be considered should the favorabl e outlook in 
inflation and commodity prices continue. 
20. Recently, problems in the global financial markets h ave intensified. Regarding 
the inflation outlook, these developments create upside r isks through potential 
portfolio movements and downside risks through aggregate demand. The CBT 
will not display a sharp reaction to temporary fluctuat ions in the financial 
markets, unless there is a long lasting deterioration in expectations and a 
significant worsening in the general pricing behavior. Y et, current 
circumstances require monetary policy to be flexible on bo th sides. Depending 
on the impact of the ongoing financial turmoil on the  domestic economy, the 
Committee will consider measured rate cuts as well as temp orary tightening 
through active liquidity management.  
21. Despite the recent decline in commodity prices, lagge d effects of the long 
lasting supply shocks continue to exert pressure on headline inflation 
especially through domestic energy prices, keeping alive th e risks of 
generalized backward looking schemes in the wage and price  setting 
behavior. Although the widening output gap should cont ain the second round 
effects of the supply shocks, the exact pace of disinflation w ould still depend 
on the extent new inflation targets serve as a reference for economic agents. 
Having this in mind, the CBT will continue to focus on e nhancing the credibility 
of the new inflation targets. 
22. A critical underlying assumption for the inflation and monetary policy outlook 
outlined above is that government expenditures and income s policy will evolve 
in line with the official projections, and that there will be no further increases in 
indirect taxes or administered price adjustments, except tho se required by the 
automatic pricing mechanisms. Any deviation from this fram ework may lead to 
a revision of the outlook for inflation and monetary p olicy. 23. In sum, despite the improvement in inflation outlo ok, the Committee assessed 
that recently heightened uncertainties in the global f inancial markets require 
monetary policy to remain cautious and decided to keep p olicy rates constant. 
Future decisions on policy rates will depend on domestic a nd external 
demand, developments in global markets, fiscal policy impl ementation, and 
other factors affecting the medium term inflation outl ook. 
24. Meeting agenda also included an assessment of liquidi ty developments in 
money markets. In order to alleviate the tightening in  liquidity conditions since 
May, the CBT has been injecting Turkish lira liquidity into the markets via repo 
operations. Recent developments suggest that tight liquid ity conditions may 
last through 2009 and onwards. The Committee members, referring to the 
main policy document “Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy in 2008” dated 
December 18th 2007, noted that the current outlook for  liquidity conditions 
may call for a technical adjustment in short term intere st rates. Accordingly, 
the Committee decided to initiate the preparations fo r the redesign of the 
operational framework of liquidity management in 200 9, details of which will be 
announced in December. 
25. Prudent monetary policy is a necessary but not a suff icient condition for 
attaining price stability. The support from fiscal policy  and structural reforms 
are also critical in this respect. Sound fiscal policy has be en one of the main 
factors in driving inflation down to single digits. The role of fiscal policy will 
continue to be critical in the road to price stability. Preserving the resilience of 
the economy, especially under current conditions, require s the continuation of 
fiscal discipline and structural reforms. In this respect, th e European Union 
accession process and the implementation of structural refor ms envisaged in 
the economic program remain to be of utmost importance.  In particular, 
advances in structural reforms, which would improve the qua lity of fiscal 
discipline and enhance the productivity, are monitored cl osely by the CBT with 
regard to their implications on macroeconomic and price st ability. 