No: 2008 - 26 
October 15, 2008 
 
 
THE CBRT PRESS RELEASE  
ON  
FOREIGN EXCHANGE BUYING AUCTIONS  
 
 
As known, the Central Bank of the Republic of Turke y (CBRT) holds foreign 
exchange buying auctions in order to build up forei gn exchange reserves in concord 
with the core principles and functioning of the flo ating exchange rate regime, during 
periods when the increase in foreign exchange suppl y outpaces that of demand. In 
this context, the foreign exchange liquidity of the  banking system is closely 
monitored, as the foreign exchange liquidity develo pments are one of the leading 
factors taken into consideration while setting the amount to be bought via auctions as 
well as deciding on the suspension of these auction s.  
The foreign exchange liquidity within the banking s ystem is regulated by the 
Liquidity Arrangement  put into force for the Turkish banking system in J une 2007 by 
the Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency. The mentioned arrangement 
enables close monitoring of foreign exchange liquid ity developments. At present, the 
foreign exchange liquidity ratios of all banks oper ating in Turkey are above the legal 
limit of minimum 80 percent.  
Although the Turkish banking system does not have p roblem of any sort 
pertaining to foreign exchange liquidity, the Foreign Exchange Deposit Market  within 
the CBRT was re-opened on 9 October 2008 with a vie w to limiting the impacts of the 
problems in global money markets on the Turkish eco nomy, which has enabled the 
conduct of foreign exchange deposit transactions am ong banks in terms of both US 
dollar and Euro. Furthermore, considering the level  of the banks’ balance sheet 
aggregates, transaction limits in the Foreign Exchange and Foreign Currency 
Markets  were revised as of 14 October 2008.  
The Foreign Exchange Deposit Market enables the banks that currently hold 
high liquidity to lend the banks in temporary need of liquidity in a convenient and 
safer fashion. The existence of such a market is an  important confidence factor in the 
current conjuncture. In fact, the operating princip les and details of the Foreign 
Exchange Deposit Market , which is specific to Turkey, have been shared wit h international community in the IMF-World Bank meeti ngs held on 11-12 October 
2008 along with G-20 meetings and have captured the  attention and support of all 
participants. 
The main objective of resuming the operations of th is market is to prevent the 
decline in the flow of foreign exchange liquidity i n Interbank Foreign Exchange 
Market due to the current uncertainty in the global  money markets. Therefore, 
Foreign Exchange Deposit Market will operate until the global uncertainties and the ir 
implications on our markets fade out and it is inte nded to function as a “ market of  last 
resort”.  
Meanwhile, in addition to the flow ensured through the Foreign Exchange 
Deposit Market, Foreign Exchange buying auctions will be suspended starting from 
16 October 2008 in order to further enhance the liq uidity conditions of Turkish banks. 
The aim is to keep the liquidity, which is permanen tly withdrawn from the foreign 
exchange market through foreign exchange buying auc tions, in the system.   
Our strategy for foreign exchange buying auctions w ill be revised in line with 
the upcoming developments in international markets and in case the Central Bank 
decides to resume holding foreign exchange buying a uctions, it will announce its 
decision to the public in ‘ Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy of The Central Ba nk of 
The Republic of Turkey for 2009 ’, which will be published in December 2008.    
 
 
 