No: 2008 – 22 
             26 August 2008 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: August 14, 2008 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices increased by 0.58 percent in Jul y, pushing annual inflation 
up to 12.06 percent due to soaring energy prices an d the base effect from 
food prices. Food and energy items have accounted f or 8.17 percentage 
points of annual inflation as of July.  
2. The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) no ted the relative 
deceleration in processed food inflation. Bread pri ces, in particular, increased 
only slightly in July after having accelerated sign ificantly in the first half of the 
year, while vegetable oil prices continued to rise,  albeit at a lower rate. The 
Committee expects the processed food inflation to e ase in the remainder of 
the year. On the unprocessed food prices front, ann ual inflation increased to 
3.75 percent due to the low base from a year earlie r. Although drought 
conditions continue to put upward pressure on pulse  prices, fruit and 
vegetable prices are expected to display a relative ly more favorable course. 
3. Energy prices increased by 5.79 percent in July on the back of the sharp rise 
in electricity and solid/liquid fuel prices. Conseq uently, annual energy price 
inflation rose to 26.87 percent. Hikes in electrici ty prices contributed by about 
0.5 percentage points to monthly inflation in July.  In August, the increase in 
natural gas prices is expected to add around 0.15 p ercentage points to 
inflation; yet, the fall in fuel prices driven by l ower oil prices will limit the rise in 
energy price inflation. 
4. The annual inflation in prices of goods excludin g energy and food remained 
unchanged from a month ago, at 4.20 percent. Season al discounts led to a 
higher rate of decline in clothing prices compared to previous years. The 
slowdown in both domestic and foreign demand had a dampening effect on 
clothing prices. The strengthening of the new Turki sh lira and the moderating 
domestic demand put downward pressure on prices of durable goods; yet 
white goods remained on the rise. 
5. Lagged effects of supply shocks continued to hav e an adverse impact on 
services prices. The year-on-year inflation in pric es for transport and catering 
services picked up further in response to a sustain ed rise in food and energy 
prices, whereas rental rates continued to decelerat e. 6. The annual rate of increase in the widely cited core CPI indexes, denoted by H 
and I, went slightly up in July on account of lagge d effects from supply shocks 
and the base effect. Seasonally adjusted monthly in flation figures, however, 
pointed to a slowdown in these indicators. In view of the downtrend in 
underlying inflation over the past two months and t he decline in oil prices, the 
Committee expects inflation to moderate gradually i n the forthcoming period. 
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
7. Recent data indicate that economic activity has continued to slow down. After 
having expanded by 6.9 percent year-on-year in the first quarter, industrial 
production moderated to an annual growth rate of 3. 1 percent during April-
June 2008. In seasonally adjusted terms, industrial  production remained flat 
over the first half of the year. 
8. Early indicators suggest that domestic demand in  the second quarter has been 
weaker than the first quarter. Consumer confidence indices stayed at lower 
levels than the first quarter, and the growth in re al consumer loans have 
further slowed down. The seasonally adjusted consum ption indices, the 
production of chemicals, domestic sales of automobi les, and imports of 
consumer goods went down during January-June 2008. In contrast, domestic 
sales of white goods recovered in the second quarte r, although the production 
in the industry remained flat. 
9. Domestic uncertainties and the depreciation of t he new Turkish lira against 
major currencies had an adverse impact on investmen t demand in the second 
quarter. The production of machinery-equipment decl ined further in seasonally 
adjusted terms, while imports of capital goods fell  for the second quarter in a 
row. Moreover, domestic sales of commercial vehicle s suggested that 
machinery-equipment investments were slightly down from the first quarter. 
10. The annual growth rate in export quantity index  was 18.2 percent year-on-year 
in the first quarter, but declined to 9.1 percent i n the second quarter. 
Seasonally adjusted figures pointed to an ongoing, yet moderating export 
growth. Recently, downside risks on global economy have increased, 
especially indicators for Euro area pointing to a s lowdown. The Committee 
assessed that external demand could be adversely af fected, should this 
outlook persist. 
11. Regarding demand indicators for the third quart er, consumer confidence 
indices rebounded slightly in July, yet still remai ned at low levels. Meanwhile, 
real consumer loans continued to grow at a subdued pace. In this context, the 
Committee stated that ongoing problems in internati onal credit markets and 
the global economy continue to restrain the aggrega te demand.  
  Monetary Policy and Risks 
12. Considering the monetary tightening since May, the Committee indicated that 
the level of the policy rate was supportive of disi nflation. The decline in longer-
term interest rates owing to easing domestic uncert ainties should support 
domestic demand. However, aggregate demand is still  expected to remain 
contained given relatively tight credit conditions,  restrictive monetary policy, 
and moderating external demand.  
13. The committee indicated that oil prices have fo llowed a significantly lower 
course than the levels assumed in the baseline scen ario in the July Inflation 
Report and other commodity prices have also display ed a downward course, 
improving the near-term inflation outlook. Conseque ntly, inflation is expected 
to fall gradually in the forthcoming period. 
14. Food prices have been evolving in line with the  projections outlined in the July 
Inflation Report. It is anticipated that processed food inflation will gradually fall 
owing to lower commodity and import prices while un processed food inflation 
will maintain its current favorable course. Yet, th e Committee underlined the 
need to remain cautious with regard to assumptions on food and oil prices, 
given the volatile course of commodity prices. 
15. The Committee noted that the rise in inflation expectations was limited 
although inflation outturn was significantly higher  than the average of market 
expectations in June. Inflation expectations should  ease gradually as inflation 
starts decelerating in the forthcoming period. 
16. Despite the expected decline in inflation in th e medium term, uncertainties 
exist regarding the degree of inflation persistence . Long-lasting supply shocks 
have been delaying disinflation and thus increasing  the risk of rising backward 
looking schemes in the wage and price setting behav ior. Although the 
widening output gap should contain the second round  effects of the supply 
shocks, the exact pace of disinflation would still depend on the extent new 
inflation targets serve as a strong reference for e conomic agents. Having this 
in mind, the CBT will continue to focus on enhancin g the credibility of the new 
inflation targets.  
17. International financial markets remain fragile.  Prevailing problems in financial 
markets continue to pose downside risks on global e conomic growth. 
Persisting uncertainties in the global economy have  been causing financial 
markets to be sensitive to data announcements. The CBT will not display a 
sharp reaction to temporary fluctuations in the fin ancial markets, unless there 
is a long lasting deterioration in expectations and  a significant worsening in the 
general pricing behavior. 18. Inflation and monetary policy outlook outlined above envisages that 
government expenditures and incomes policy will evo lve in line with the official 
projections and that there will be no further incre ases in indirect taxes or 
administered price adjustments, except those requir ed by the automatic 
pricing mechanisms. Any deviation from this framewo rk may lead to a revision 
of the outlook for inflation and monetary policy. 
19. In sum, prevailing risks regarding the price se tting behavior and ongoing 
global uncertainties require monetary policy to rem ain cautious and to be more 
responsive to incoming data. Future decisions on po licy rates will depend on 
developments in global markets, external demand, fi scal policy 
implementation, and other factors affecting the med ium term inflation outlook. 
20. Prudent monetary policy is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for 
attaining price stability. The support from fiscal policy and structural reforms 
are also critical in this respect. Sound fiscal pol icy has been one of the main 
factors in driving inflation down to single digits.  The role of fiscal policy will 
continue to be critical in the road to price stabil ity. Preserving the resilience of 
the economy, especially under current conditions, r equires the continuation of 
fiscal discipline and structural reforms. In this r espect, the European Union 
accession process and the implementation of structu ral reforms envisaged in 
the economic program remain to be of utmost importa nce. In particular, 
advances in structural reforms, which would improve  the quality of fiscal 
discipline and enhance the productivity, are monito red closely by the CBT with 
regard to their implications on macroeconomic and p rice stability. 
 