No: 2008-15  
16 June 2008 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: June 16, 2008 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah 
Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has d ecided to increase the policy 
rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate from 15 .75 percent to 16.25 percent, and 
lending rate from 19.75 percent to 20.25 percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 
p.m. from 11.75 percent to 12.25 percent, lending r ate from 22.75 percent to 23.25 
percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week matu rity borrowing facilities provided 
for primary dealers via repo transactions from 18.7 5 percent to 19.25 percent. 
 
Recent readings on the supply and demand conditions  are largely in line with the 
predictions of the April Inflation Report. Difficul ties in international credit markets continue 
to restrain the domestic demand, while external dem and displays a relatively strong 
course. Overall, aggregate demand conditions will s upport disinflation. 
The Committee notes that recently there have been f avorable developments in 
unprocessed food prices, while oil prices have foll owed a significantly higher course than 
the prices assumed in the baseline scenario in the April Inflation Report. Consequently, 
inflation is expected to decelerate starting from t he last quarter of the year, ending 2009 
close to the 7.5 percent inflation target. Adverse impacts of the supply side shocks on the 
economy will be more limited should the economic ag ents align their expectations for the 
next three years with the target rates of 7,5 perce nt, 6.5 percent and 5.5 percent, 
respectively. 
Ongoing uncertainties and supply side shocks contin ue to pose risks on inflation. 
The Central Bank will consider a further measured r ate hike when needed, so as to prevent 
the potential second-round effects of such risk fac tors. The extent and timing  of a 
possible future rate hike will depend on developmen ts in global markets, external demand, 
fiscal policy implementation, and other factors aff ecting the medium term inflation outlook. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance . 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within eight 
working days.  
 