No: 2009 - 14 
16 April 2009 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: April 16, 2009 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has d ecided to lower the policy 
rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate is decr eased from 10.50 percent to 
9.75 percent, while lending rate is decreased from 13 percent to 12.25 percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate between 4:00 p.m. – 
5:00 p.m. is decreased from 6.5 percent to 5.75 per cent, while lending rate is 
decreased from 16 percent to 15.25 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week matu rity borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions is decreased from 12 percent 
to 11.25 percent. 
 
Recent data releases indicate that domestic economi c activity has continued to 
slow down in the first quarter. Problems in interna tional credit markets persist and there 
are no clear signs of improvement in the outlook fo r global economy. These 
developments suggest that the economic activity is not likely to recover anytime soon. 
Therefore, downward pressures on inflation are expe cted to continue. Moreover, 
disinflation is expected to gain pace in the near t erm, partly driven by the past declines 
in oil and other commodity prices. In light of thes e assessments and the partial 
improvement in risk indicators, the Committee has d ecided to cut policy rates by 75 
basis points. 
The Committee has indicated that the rate cuts have  lowered the probability of 
significantly undershooting the end-year inflation target. However, the tightness in 
financial conditions still persists to some extent,  and uncertainties regarding the impact 
of the problems in financial markets on the real ec onomy remain high, suggesting that 
downside risks still remain. The Central Bank will continue to take the necessary 
measures to contain the adverse effects of the glob al financial turmoil on the domestic 
economy, provided that they do not conflict with th e price stability objective. Looking 
forward, the Committee envisages that the next rate  cut may be measured, and that it 
may be necessary for the monetary policy to maintai n an easing bias for a considerable 
period. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance . 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
eight working days.  
 