No: 2009 – 35 
02 December 2009  
 
 SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: November 19, 2009 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices surged by 2.41 percent in Octobe r, while inflation declined to 
5.08 percent year-on-year. October price developmen ts coincided with the 
outlook presented in the Summary of the September M onetary Policy 
Committee Meeting. While annual inflation decreased , monthly inflation picked 
up dramatically due to seasonal price hikes in food  and clothing, renewed 
electricity tariffs and tax adjustments on durable goods.  
2. The annual rate of increase in food prices fell to 5.82 percent in October. 
Lower exports of fruits and vegetables brought annu al food inflation down, 
while soaring meat prices put upward pressure on fo od and catering prices.  
3. Energy prices rose by 2.50 percent in October, o f which the hikes in residential 
electricity tariffs accounted for 2.30 percentage p oints. Consequently, the rise 
in energy prices added about 0.35 percentage points  to CPI inflation. Despite 
having edged up since May, energy prices still hove r around the year-ago 
level. 
4. Prices of durable goods were up 4.24 percent in October following the 
expiration of the temporary tax cuts. Adjusted for changes in taxes, the rate of 
increase in durable goods appears to remain subdued  and stable.  
5. Annual services inflation, which was on a contin uous declining path in the last 
one year, displayed a modest increase in October. H owever, the assessment 
of the subcategories indicates that this developmen t would not adversely 
affect the broader outlook. Although, seasonally ad justed monthly increase in 
services inflation is higher than the levels regist ered during the first quarter 
(when the effects of the economic slump on inflatio n was most significant), it 
remains well below the pre-crisis average.  
6. Overall, adjusted for tax changes, core inflatio n measures suggest that 
underlying inflation continues to run at low levels .  
   Factors Affecting Inflation 
7. In line with the Monetary Policy Committee’s (th e Committee) previous 
assessments, recent data releases indicate that the  ongoing recovery in 
economic activity would be gradual and protracted. During the third quarter, 
average industrial production was slightly up from the second quarter, in 
seasonally adjusted terms. While October’s capacity  utilization data indicate 
that production continues to grow modestly, conside rable slack remains. The 
Committee emphasized that the recovery in productio n is slow, and noted that 
the support of the fiscal measures to the productio n has been limited at this 
stage, and that underlying economic activity is sti ll weak. Against this 
backdrop, the Committee reiterated that the current  pace of economic 
recovery would not put upward pressure on inflation , as it implies low resource 
utilization for quite some time.  
8. Consumption demand has displayed a weaker course , after having increased 
markedly during the second quarter. Production in n on-durable goods, which 
was not targeted by the fiscal stimulus, continued to contract in September, 
also partly owing to the significant income effect.  Accordingly, consumer 
goods production fell quarter-on-quarter in seasona lly adjusted terms during 
the third quarter, while imports of consumer goods rose at a more moderate 
pace than in the second quarter. Production and imp orts data suggest that 
consumption demand was essentially flat in the thir d quarter. Moreover, 
following the expiration of the tax incentives in O ctober, indicators point to 
further weakening in domestic demand. The lack of d omestic demand 
continued to increase as a factor restraining capac ity utilization during October 
in seasonally adjusted terms, and at the same time,  consumption indices 
declined significantly month-on-month. 
9. Domestic investment demand remains weak. Excludi ng transport vehicles, the 
production of capital goods flattened out during th e third quarter in seasonally 
adjusted terms. A similar pattern was also observed  in capital goods imports. 
Taken together, these indicators suggest that, desp ite a slight quarterly 
rebound in the third quarter, private machinery and  equipment investments 
remain at low levels. The Committee restated that t he current demand 
uncertainty and idle capacity might continue to hav e a dampening effect on 
investment. 
10. Foreign demand remains weak. The export quantit y index dropped by 11.8 
percent year-on-year during the third quarter, but was up quarter-on-quarter in 
seasonally adjusted terms. October and November dat a indicate that exports 
continue to recover modestly. 
11. Another factor restraining capacity utilization  has been the weak demand in 
foreign markets. Although this adverse impact has b een easing since June, owing in particular to the improved outlook for eur o area growth and new 
export market opportunities, it remains to be seen whether the recent 
improvement in the foreign demand outlook is sustai nable. Committee 
members noted that the global economic recovery dri ven by fiscal and 
monetary expansion packages since the second quarte r of 2009 might lose 
momentum with the gradual withdrawal of these measu res. Thus, the 
Committee indicated that it would take quite a long  time for foreign demand to 
return to pre-crisis levels. 
12. Employment conditions are likely to take a long  time to fully recover. In fact, 
having declined during the past two months in seaso nally adjusted terms, non-
farm unemployment rose again month-on-month during July-September 
period. Accordingly, non-farm unemployment climbed to 17 percent in the third 
quarter, which is 4.1 percentage points higher comp ared to the previous year. 
Applications for unemployment benefits remained at high levels in October, 
indicating that unemployment would remain elevated during the final quarter. 
In view of the current economic outlook, the Commit tee maintained the view 
that it would take a long time for the employment c onditions to fully recover. 
 
  Monetary Policy and Risks 
13. The Committee, in light of the assessments summ arized above, reiterated that 
resource utilization, and thus inflation, would con tinue to hover around low 
levels. While headline annual inflation could displ ay some upward movements 
through mid-2010 due to strong base effects, it was  reemphasized that this 
possibility had already been reflected in the monet ary stance outlined in the 
October Inflation Report. Accordingly, the Committe e indicated that the 
monetary policy stance outlined in the Inflation Re port has not changed.   
14. The policy rate cuts implemented since November  2008, and the 
improvements in global risk perceptions have starte d to exert favorable effects 
on credit markets. Although the recent Banks’ Loan Tendency Survey 
suggests that banks are still cautious in extending  loans, there are signs of 
easing lending standards, especially in consumer lo ans. The Survey also 
reveals the expectation of a continued recovery in credit demand. However, 
the effectiveness of the credit channel in supporti ng economic activity has 
been somewhat restrained owing to the ongoing tight ness in lending 
standards for small- and medium-sized enterprises a nd for longer-term loans. 
15. Although recent data releases indicate that the  worst is likely to be over, 
concerns regarding the strength of the global recov ery remain. In particular, 
ongoing problems in credit and labor markets pose d ownside risks for global 
activity. Should global conditions deteriorate agai n, and consequently delay the domestic recovery, another cycle of rate cuts w ould be considered. Given 
the lingering problems across the global economy an d the ongoing uncertainty 
regarding the strength of the recovery, the Committ ee reiterated that it would 
be necessary for the monetary policy to maintain an  easing bias for a long 
period of time. Moreover, the Committee emphasized that policy rates had 
been cut by 1025 basis points since November 2008, and thus, rather than 
focusing on the level of the policy rate in the cur rent circumstances, it would 
be more important to keep rates at low levels for a n extended period. 
Therefore, it was indicated that future rate decisi ons would be conditional on 
economic data and developments. 
16. According to the Committee members, another pos sible scenario involves a 
surge in capital inflows to emerging markets owing to the relative improvement 
of credit risk across these countries. Ample liquid ity driven by the 
expansionary fiscal and monetary policies on a worl dwide scale, coupled with 
rising risk appetites, have led to large capital in flows to emerging markets. 
Current slack in the economy would imply that a fal l in the cost of imported 
inputs could be rapidly transmitted to consumer pri ces, suggesting that a 
further acceleration in capital inflows may exacerb ate downward risks on 
inflation. Realization of such a scenario could lea d to temporarily lower policy 
rates. 
17. The Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) will continue to monitor fiscal policy 
developments closely while formulating monetary pol icy. Enhancing the 
framework set out in the Medium Term Program (MTP) through further 
structural adjustments to strengthen fiscal discipl ine, would support the 
improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk. Should the goals set out in the MTP 
be implemented, it would be possible to keep policy  rates at single digits 
throughout the forecast horizon. 
18. The course of oil and other commodity prices co nstitutes another important 
risk factor. Ample liquidity driven by countercycli cal policies on a global scale 
has encouraged speculative investments not only int o emerging market 
currencies, but also into commodities. Therefore, o il and other commodity 
price developments warrant careful surveillance, ev en under a scenario of a 
gradual global economic recovery. Nonetheless, weak  domestic demand 
conditions would limit the pass-through stemming fr om upside cost-push 
shocks. Therefore, the Committee will not react to short-term commodity price 
volatility, especially when resource utilization re mains at depressed levels. 
However, if an uptrend in commodity prices reflects  a strong and durable 
rebound in global activity that would in turn creat e inflationary pressures, then 
monetary policy will react appropriately to keep in flation in line with the 
medium-term inflation targets. 19. The CBT has been taking the necessary measures to contain the adverse 
effects of the global financial turmoil on the dome stic economy. However, 
prudent monetary policy is necessary, but not suffi cient to maintain the 
resilience of the economy against the global crisis . Therefore, strengthening 
the commitment to fiscal discipline and the structu ral reform agenda is also 
critical for facilitating expectations management a nd thus for supporting the 
effectiveness of the monetary policy decisions. In this respect, timely 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term 
Program and European Union accession process remain s to be of utmost 
importance. 
 