No: 2009 - 06 
26 January 2009  
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: January 15, 2009 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices decreased by 0.41 percent in December, and annual 
inflation in 2008 materialized at 10.06 percent. Fal ling oil and other commodity 
prices continued to push down energy and processed food in flation, and the 
marked slowdown in economic activity put further downward  pressure on 
services inflation. In addition, core inflation indicator s remained on the decline.  
2. Unprocessed food prices rose sharply for the third consecu tive month in 
December on elevated vegetable prices, whereas annual inf lation in 
processed food continued to fall, registering a cumulative  drop of 10 
percentage points in five months on the back of improved p roduction and 
lower international prices. Inflation in processed food prices is expected to 
decelerate further in the first half of 2009. 
3. Energy prices dropped by 2.58 percent in December, m ainly on account of 
plummeting world crude oil prices that exerted a strong downward pressure on 
domestic fuel and bottled gas prices. With the sizeable d rop in December, the 
fall in domestic fuel prices reached a cumulative of 20 pe rcent in five months. 
Given the current falling trend in international commo dity prices, energy prices 
will continue to support disinflation. 
4. Annual inflation in goods excluding energy and food  continued to decline in 
December on falling clothing prices, ending 2008 at 3.7 5 percent. After a 
sharp rise in October and November, prices for durable go ods (excl. gold) 
decreased by 0.43 percent in December. Yet, the low base  pushed the group’s 
annual inflation up by 0.5 points. Recent price develop ments indicate that the 
short term pass-through of the recent weakening in the T urkish lira had a 
significantly lower impact on prices of durable goods comp ared with previous 
years.  
5. Services inflation remains on the decline owing to lo wer costs and weaker 
domestic demand. Annual inflation fell in all sub-categ ories of services in 
December. The marked decline in processed food prices contin ued to have a 
favorable impact on catering prices, while plunging oil prices brought annual 
inflation in transport prices down. The downtrend in t ransport prices is likely to become more pronounced in the upcoming period. Meanwhi le, rent inflation 
continued to moderate in December, falling by 0.4 poi nts to 11.85 percent 
year-on-year. The Monetary Policy Committee (the Com mittee) expects 
services inflation to decelerate further in coming months.  
6. In line with these developments, seasonally adjusted co re inflation figures also 
remained on a downward track in December, suggesting tha t underlying 
inflation continued to slow down. This development is pa rticularly remarkable, 
given that in the last quarter there has been a signifi cant depreciation in 
exchange rates. 
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
7. Gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 0.5 percent year- on-year in the third 
quarter of 2008. Seasonally adjusted figures suggest tha t the level of 
economic activity was below the previous quarter.  
8. Recent readings indicate that the slowdown in the do mestic economic activity 
has further intensified in the fourth quarter. Industr ial production, which has 
been falling since July in seasonally adjusted terms, has sh own a 10.7 percent 
annual drop during October-November period. Readings o n capacity utilization 
also point to a further weakening in the industrial pr oduction in December.  
9. Fourth-quarter indicators for consumer demand continu ed to trend downward. 
Production of consumer goods was significantly down during  October-
November from a quarter ago. The demand for imported  consumer goods also 
followed the same pattern. After the sizable drop in October and November, 
consumer confidence indexes remained at low levels in Decemb er, and 
consumer lending declined in nominal terms in the fourt h quarter. Overall, 
recent readings suggest that private consumer spending contr acted both in 
quarterly and annual terms in the final quarter of 2 008. 
10. Heightened signs of prolonged global economic recessio n since October 
worsened the outlook for foreign demand. After having grown by 12.2 percent 
year-on-year during the first nine months of 2008, exp orts quantity index 
dropped by 8.4 percent in October and November. Moreove r, December 
Business Tendency Survey (BTS) has indicated expectations of further 
deterioration in export orders for the first quarter o f 2009. 
11. Production and imports of capital goods, key proxies f or investment demand, 
fell by 22.4 and 16.5 percent year-on-year, respectivel y, during October-
November, and were quite below their third-quarter a verage in seasonally 
adjusted terms. The data on production, imports and expo rts of investment 
goods indicate that machinery-equipment investment spendi ng have dropped remarkably in the fourth-quarter in annual terms. In fact, according to BTS 
results, there is a growing number of firms that consider  their production 
capacity as “more than sufficient” in view of their curren t order books and 
demand expectations. Hence, twelve-month ahead investment expectations 
continued to weaken. 
12. The slowdown in economic activity is clearly reflected in the labor market. 
Non-farm unemployment increased by 1.7 points to 14 pe rcent in September-
November period from a year ago. The Committee noted  that non-farm 
unemployment is likely to rise further, dampening both  unit labor costs and 
domestic demand in the forthcoming period. 
 
  Monetary Policy and Risks 
13. The Committee assessed the assumptions underlying the outlook in the 
Inflation Report. It was stated that currently the most  critical variable is the 
global economic growth. Latest forecasts suggest that ongoi ng problems in 
international credit markets and the global economy wil l last longer than 
previously envisaged. With the intensification of global financial crisis, overall 
loss of confidence, wealth destruction and tightening of credit 
conditions especially for the business sector have led to a marked 
downturn in the global economic activity. Growth forecast s for the global 
economy have been constantly revised downwards in the last couple of 
months. The Committee assessed that it would be appropri ate to use the 
predictions appeared in the latest Consensus Forecasts survey for the 
baseline scenario in the Inflation Report. Accordingly, the outlook in the 
Inflation Report was based on the assumption of a gradu al recovery in the 
global economy starting from the first quarter of 2010 . 
14. The Committee stated that significant fall in oil and other commodity prices 
were having a favorable impact on disinflation. Energy price inflation displayed 
a significant fall in the last quarter of the year, ye t it materialized at around 20 
percent by the end of the year. Therefore, given the recent decline in oil 
prices, the Committee members think there is still ample room for fall in energy 
inflation. Accordingly, the contribution of energy pri ces to headline inflation is 
expected to come down considerably throughout 2009. In a  similar vein, 
processed food inflation is expected to decelerate further . 
15. Therefore, downward pressures on both domestic and e xternal demand and 
inflation will continue. Judging that inflation will be close to the target by mid-
2009 and that the probability of undershooting the e nd-year target has 
increased, the Committee decided to cut policy rates by 2 00 basis points. 16. Credit conditions tightened considerably and bank lo an rates displayed a 
sharp rise after the intensification of the global fina ncial crisis. The pace of 
consumer credit growth suggests that financial conditions we re restrictive in 
the last quarter of 2008, as consumer loans fell in nomi nal terms for the first 
time in the near history. Recent easing in monetary po licy has helped to 
relieve the tension in domestic credit markets, as there ha s been a significant 
fall in consumer loan rates following the policy rate cu ts. Yet, business loan 
rates remain elevated. The Committee underscored the ad verse impact of the 
weakening economic activity on corporate profits and thus o n lending appetite. 
In this context, it was indicated that the tightening in  financial conditions might 
persist; necessitating interest rate cuts to continue, albei t at a decelerating 
pace.  
17. Uncertainties regarding the impact of the problems in financial markets on the 
real economy remain at high levels. Developments in the global economy will 
be the main determinant of the outlook for domestic in flation and monetary 
policy in the medium term. Hence, in order to enhance the predictability and 
transparency of monetary policy, the Committee concluded  that it would be 
useful to present two alternative scenarios in the final chapter of the January 
Inflation Report, each one based on different timing and speed of the recovery 
in the global economic activity. The two alternative scena rios are embedded in 
our forecasts through four main channels: External trade,  portfolio flows, 
commodity prices, and credit channels. 
18. The first alternative scenario is based on a relativel y fast recovery in the world 
economy. In this scenario we assume that the monetary and  fiscal measures 
taken by the major developed economies will be adequate  to start pulling  the 
global economy out of the recession in the second half of  2009. Accordingly, a 
rapid and stronger-than-envisaged recovery in the global  economic activity 
would lead to a rebound in commodity prices, resurge in  capital inflows to 
emerging economies, pick up in external demand, and rela xation in credit 
conditions. Under this scenario, meeting medium term inf lation targets of 7,5, 
6,5 and 5,5 percent in the 2009-2011 period, respective ly, could require 
measured policy rate hikes towards the end of 2009. 
19. The second alternative scenario is based on the assumpti on of a further 
deepening in global crisis in the first half of 2009 an d an extended period of 
weakness in global economic activity until the second half o f 2010. In this 
scenario a more protracted and slow recovery would lead t o another wave of 
portfolio shock for emerging markets, weak external demand , tighter credit 
conditions, and further drops in commodity prices. Our fo recasts suggest that, 
in such a case, medium term inflation targets could be un dershot even with a 
measured sequel of policy rate cuts throughout 2009. 20. The Committee noted that pass-through from exchange  rates to the domestic 
inflation has been so far limited compared to previous e pisodes, owing to 
weakening domestic demand and falling import prices. Yet , it was indicated  
that it would be too early to make a conclusive statement  on the extent of the 
medium term pass-through.  
21. Finally, it is worth to mention that a critical assu mption underlying the inflation 
and monetary policy outlook outlined above is that gover nment fiscal stance 
will remain neutral in cyclically adjusted terms, and th at there will be no 
changes in indirect taxes or administered price adjustments,  except those 
required by the existing automatic pricing mechanisms. Any  significant 
deviation from this framework may lead to a revision of the outlook for inflation 
and monetary policy. 
22. The Central Bank will continue to take the necessary measures to contain the 
adverse effects of the global financial turmoil on the d omestic economy, 
provided that they do not conflict with the price stabil ity objective. The extent 
and the timing of a possible future rate cut will depe nd on the factors affecting 
inflation outlook. 
23. Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not sufficien t to maintain the 
resilience of the economy against the global crisis, especia lly under current 
conditions. Preserving the fiscal discipline and strengtheni ng the structural 
reform agenda is also critical to mitigate the adverse ef fects of the ongoing 
shocks on the domestic economy. In this respect, the European  Union 
accession process and the implementation of structural refor ms envisaged in 
the economic program remain to be of utmost importance.  In particular, 
advances in structural reforms, which would improve the qua lity of fiscal 
discipline and enhance productivity gains, are monitored closely by the Central 
Bank with regard to their implications for macroeconomic and price stability. 