No 2009 – 20

18 June 2009

THE CBRT PRESS RELEASE ON LONG-TERM REPO AUCTIONS
1. As it is known, the press release “Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy for
2009” of December 16, 2008, stated:
a. In paragraph 45, “In cases where the liquidity shortage in the market
increases and/or becomes pronounced to be permanent, the Central
Bank

will

rearrange

its

operational

framework

of

liquidity

management and opt for a technical interest rate cut”,
b. In paragraph 47, “In cases where the liquidity shortage in the market
increases and becomes permanent, the funding of the liquidity
shortage only by repo auctions with a one-week maturity may have
adverse effects on longer-term interest rates and the credit
mechanism. In order to eliminate likely negative outcomes, the
Central Bank will hold repo auctions with maturities up to 91 days
and purchase government securities to prevent funding being
concentrated on one-week maturities. Moreover, depending on the
permanence of the liquidity shortage, the effectiveness of long-term
repo and government securities purchasing transactions, the TRYdenominated required reserve ratios may be reduced to a limited
extent”.

2. A reasonable level of liquidity shortage emerged in the market since May
2008. This shortage has been eliminated via regular one-week repo
auctions. As opposed to the ongoing liquidity squeeze in the market,
uncertainties regarding long term liquidity developments still persist and no
clear projections can be made whether the current liquidity conditions will
be permanent or not. Hence, the timing of the technical interest rate cut will
be determined at a later date. However, our forecasts based on available
data suggest that the liquidity squeeze in the market is expected to last for
at least the next three to four months with occasional hikes. Thus, in the
last Monetary Policy Committee Meeting, with the aim of enhancing the

sound functioning of the banks’ liquidity management and transfer
mechanism, in addition to the one-week maturity repo auctions which are
the basic funding instruments, it was agreed that it would be useful to
resort to repo transactions with maturities up to 3 months when necessary,

3. In this context, in addition to the one-week maturity repo auctions, which
are the basic funding instruments, the Central Bank will start to use repo
transactions with maturities up to 3 months actively beginning from June
19, 2009. Accordingly,
.

a. The basic funding instrument of the Central Bank will continue to be
one-week maturity repo auctions, which are to be held regularly.
b. For the next one month period, the long-term repo auctions will be
held every Friday with three-month maturity, whereas in the
subsequent period, they may be held on Fridays with one, two or
three-month maturities depending upon the projections of the
liquidity shortage. The duration of the liquidity shortage will be
determinant in the choice of maturity while the extent of the liquidity
shortage will be determinant in setting transaction amounts.
c. Long-term repo auctions will not be used as an instrument to contain
short-term interest rates, which are an indicator of the Central
Bank’s monetary policy stance, but rather they will be utilized in
order to meet the structural liquidity need. Therefore, in the case of
long-term repo auctions, the auction amount will be announced,
auction interest rates will not stand as an indicator of the current
stance of monetary policy and interest rates will be determined
according to market conditions.
d. The Central Bank will be able to hold standard one-week maturity
repo auctions and long-term repo auctions on the same date. The
repo auctions to be announced on Reuters “CBTF” page at 10:00
a.m. will be held at 11:00 a.m. and due attention will be paid to
announcing the results no later than at 11:30 a.m. on Reuters
“CBTG” page.

e. Other existing auction rules will be applicable for long-term repo

auctions as well.

