 
No: 2009 – 27  
28 August 2009  
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: August 18, 2009 
 
 
Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices increased by 0.25 percent in Jul y, while inflation decreased 
to 5.39 percent year-on-year. Despite the fall in a verage inflation, core inflation 
measures rose on the back of the year-on-year slowd own in seasonal clothing 
discounts during July, and because of tax adjustmen ts on some durable 
goods. Excluding tax effects, underlying inflation continue to hover around low 
levels. 
2. Despite having decelerated in July, annual unpro cessed food inflation still 
remains elevated. In contrast, processed food price s increased by a mere 0.33 
percent in July, falling year-on-year for the first  time since the inception of the 
consumer price index. The annual rate of increase i n processed food prices is 
likely to rise owing to base effects in coming mont hs, while there may be a 
downward correction in unprocessed food prices. 
3. Changes in energy prices helped annual inflation  ease further. Energy prices 
dropped by 0.21 percent in July, leading to a sharp  decline in annual inflation, 
partly owing to the high base effect from a year ea rlier. Crude oil prices fell 
month-on-month, but the fall could hardly pass thro ugh to the domestic market 
owing to the mid-July lump sum special consumption tax levied on major fuel 
products. Given that the tax increase will be partl y reflected in August inflation 
and noting the pick up in international oil prices,  fuel prices are expected to 
rise in August. 
4. The annual rate of increase in goods excluding e nergy and food climbed to 
4.79 percent in July, largely due to tax adjustment s, as stated in the previous 
Summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting. P rices of tobacco 
products soared by 11.57 percent due to the minimum  lump sum tax 
adjustment, adding approximately 0.5 percentage poi nts to July inflation. 
Moreover, prices of durable goods (excluding gold) rose by 2.09 percent due 
to phased-out tax cuts on certain consumer goods. T aken together, the tax 
adjustments pushed inflation up by around 0.7 perce ntage points in July. 
Meanwhile, clothing prices decreased at a slower pa ce in July compared to a year ago owing to early seasonal discounts and a mo dest rise in clothing 
consumption. 
5. The rate of increase in services prices continue d to slow down amid 
weakening domestic demand. Services inflation decli ned to a historic low of 
5.92 percent year-on-year in July. Across the subca tegories, prices for 
transport services, rents, as well as restaurants a nd hotels increased at a 
more moderate pace than a year earlier. In seasonal ly adjusted terms, the 
monthly rent inflation continued smoothly along a d ownward path. At the same 
time, while tax measures to restore fiscal balances  led to a marked increase in 
compulsory traffic insurance premiums and notary pu blic fees in July, inflation 
in services is expected to slow further in the fort hcoming period.  
6. Overall, the Monetary Policy Committee (the Comm ittee) noted that trend 
inflation is hovering around low levels and advanci ng along a path that is 
consistent with medium-term targets. 
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
7. Recent data releases are in line with the outloo k presented in the July Inflation 
Report. Industrial production fell by 9.7 percent i n June, at a more modest 
annual rate than in May. Critically however, much o f the improvement in the 
year-on-year difference was caused by calendar effe cts. Accordingly, the 
Committee emphasized that judgments based only on a nnual growth rates 
may be misleading. In fact, seasonally adjusted Jun e data indicate that 
industrial production hardly changed month-on-month . 
8. July data on capacity utilization show that the modest recovery in production 
has continued into the third quarter. In seasonally  adjusted terms, total 
capacity utilization increased by 0.5 percentage po int month-on-month, 
running 1 percentage point above the second-quarter  average. The 
Committee noted that although private sector capaci ty utilization displayed 
some recovery during the second quarter, it still r emained at relatively 
depressed levels.  
9. Recent indicators for consumption confirmed that  the fiscal stimulus measures 
had only a temporary impact on domestic demand. Acc ordingly, consumption 
indices and domestic automobiles sales fell sharply  in July, while the demand 
for consumer loans slowed down as well. Expectation s for domestic demand 
and consumer confidence indices show similar patter ns. Specifically, 
according to the July Business Tendency Survey, thr ee-month-ahead 
expectations for the number of new orders received from the domestic market 
declined month-on-month. Similarly, consumer confid ence indices decreased 
for the first time in a long while. The Committee i ndicated that these developments added to the uncertainty about the str ength of recovery in 
consumer demand. 
10. Domestic investment demand continues to fall. I n particular, data on capital 
goods indicate that machinery and equipment investm ents declined further in 
the second quarter. More specifically, the producti on of capital goods dropped 
by 35.8 percent year-on-year in the second quarter and remained flat quarter-
on-quarter in seasonally adjusted terms. Meanwhile,  imports of investment 
goods fell by 18.3 percent year-on-year, but picked  up in quarterly terms. 
Investment expectations in the Business Tendency Su rvey and the demand 
for investment-related credit in Banks’ Loans Tende ncy Survey reveal similar 
patterns, indicating an unfavorable outlook for inv estment spending. 
11. Foreign demand remains weak. The seasonally adj usted export quantity index 
(excluding gold) has increased gradually during Apr il-June period. Data 
published by Turkish Exporters Assembly show that t he modest growth of 
underlying exports continued during July and August . The Committee 
reiterated that foreign demand is likely to remain anemic in the near term, as 
the recent signs of global economic recovery do not  exhibit a strong enough 
recovery. 
12. Demand uncertainty remains high, causing firms to maintain low inventory 
levels and embrace a more cautious stance regarding  production activities, 
which continues to suppress investment demand and e mployment prospects. 
In fact, there have not been any notable improvemen ts regarding employment 
conditions. Non-farm employment dropped by 2.8 perc ent year-on-year during 
the second quarter, while non-farm unemployment inc reased by 5.5 
percentage points year-on-year to 17 percent. In se asonally adjusted terms, 
non-farm employment losses are still apparent acros s industrial sectors and in 
related services including commercial and transport -communication segments. 
The growing number of non-farm unemployed as well a s the rise in labor 
participation rates led to an increase in non-farm unemployment. 
13. Overall, recent data releases indicate that the  ongoing recovery in economic 
activity would be gradual and protracted. 
 
  Monetary Policy and Risks 
14. The Committee observed that despite some recent  easing, tightness in 
financial conditions still persists. According to t he CBT Bank Loan Tendency 
Survey, the tightening of business loan lending sta ndards continued—albeit at 
a slower pace—during the second quarter. Moreover, the survey suggests that 
any support the credit channel would have regarding  the recovery of economic 
activity would be limited during the second quarter , given that the major driver of the firms’ demand for loans has been the desire to restructure their debt 
obligations. 
15. The Committee members have indicated that bond yields have fallen in line 
with the outlook presented in the Inflation Report,  and predicted that bank 
lending rates for consumer loans would follow gradu ally, as the lagged effects 
of cumulative easing of 900 basis points since Nove mber 2008 would start to 
ease credit conditions towards the last quarter of this year. However, the 
current unfavorable labor market conditions are exp ected to restrain the 
recovery in consumption, and therefore domestic dem and conditions would 
continue to support disinflation. Therefore, in lin e with the perspective outlined 
in the Inflation Report, inflation is expected to r emain at low levels for a long 
period of time. 
16. The Committee reemphasized the importance of fi scal discipline in maintaining 
low levels of medium- and long-term interest rates,  which are key 
determinants regarding the recovery of both consump tion and investment. The 
implementation of a credible fiscal framework would  bring down risk premiums 
further, and hence lead to a permanent fall in long er-term interest rates. This, 
in turn, would foster investment and labor demand, and thereby support the 
recovery process. Therefore, the establishment of a  credible medium-term 
program ensuring fiscal discipline and debt sustain ability would have an 
expansionary rather than contractionary impact on e conomic activity. 
17. The Committee members stated that recent data r egarding the global 
economy were consistent with the outlook presented in the Inflation Report. 
Although the data on economic activity suggest that  the worst may be over, 
ongoing tight credit conditions and elevated unempl oyment rates are expected 
to hold back the recovery in global economy for a w hile.  
18. The Committee observed that the cumulative effe cts of the commodity price 
declines has contributed to the slowdown in domesti c inflation over the past 
year, especially by lowering processed food and ene rgy inflation, leading to a 
significant base effect. Therefore, headline inflat ion may increase modestly at 
the turn of the year through mid-2010, mainly owing  to base effects, although 
trend inflation is expected to remain at low levels  in the period ahead. It should 
be underscored that a rise in inflation stemming fr om this channel was already 
factored into the monetary policy stance outlined i n the July Inflation Report. 
19. Overall, the tightness in financial conditions continues to some extent, and 
uncertainties regarding the impact of the problems in financial markets on the 
real economy persist, suggesting that downside risk s still remain. Therefore, 
the Committee reiterated that it would be necessary  for monetary policy to 
maintain an easing bias for a long period of time, and envisaged that further measured rate cuts would be necessary in the short term unless there is a 
robust recovery in the economic activity. 
20. The CBT has been taking the necessary measures at its disposal to contain 
the adverse effects of the global crisis on the dom estic economy. Prudent 
monetary policy is necessary but not sufficient to maintain the resilience of 
the economy against the global crisis. Therefore, s trengthening the 
commitment to fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda is also 
critical for facilitating expectations management a nd for supporting the 
effectiveness of the monetary policy decisions. In this respect, timely 
implementation of the structural reforms in the con text of the European Union 
accession process remains to be of utmost importanc e. 
 