No:2009 – 22             16 July 2009 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: July 16, 2009 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç, 
M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has d ecided to lower the policy 
rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate is decr eased from 8.75 percent to 
8.25 percent, while lending rate is decreased from 11.25 percent to 10.75 
percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate between 4:00 p.m. – 
5:00 p.m. is decreased from 4.75 percent to 4.25 pe rcent, while lending rate is 
decreased from 14.25 percent to 13.75 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week matu rity borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions is decreased from 10.25 
percent to 9.75 percent. 
 
Recent data releases signal that the recovery in do mestic economic activity will 
be slow and protracted. Although there are signs of  partial improvement in private 
consumption spending, its strength and resilience r emain to be seen. External demand 
remains weak, domestic investment demand continues to contract, and labor market 
conditions are not expected to recover in the near term. Therefore, inflation is expected 
to remain at low levels for a long period of time. 
The tightness in financial conditions continues to some extent, and uncertainties 
regarding the impact of the problems in financial m arkets on the real economy persist, 
suggesting that downside risks still remain. Theref ore, the Committee reiterates that it 
will be necessary for the monetary policy to mainta in an easing bias for a long period of 
time and envisages that further measured rate cuts will be necessary in the short term 
unless there is a robust recovery in the economic a ctivity. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance . 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
eight working days.  
 