No: 2009-11 
19 March 2009 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: March 19, 2009 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has d ecided to lower the policy 
rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate is decr eased from 11.50 percent to 
10.50 percent, while lending rate is decreased from  14 percent to 13 percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate between 4:00 p.m. – 
5:00 p.m. is decreased from 7.5 percent to 6.5 perc ent, while lending rate is 
decreased from 17 percent to 16 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week matu rity borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions is decreased from 13 percent 
to 12 percent. 
 
Recent data releases indicate that domestic economi c activity continues to slow 
down. Problems in international credit markets pers ist while forecasts of global 
economic growth are consistently revised downwards,  suggesting that the economic 
activity is not likely to recover anytime soon. The refore, downward pressures on inflation 
are expected to continue. Moreover, ongoing decline s in oil and other commodity prices 
are having a favorable impact on disinflation. The Committee has noted that inflation 
may display a temporary rise in March due to a shar p increase in unprocessed food 
prices, before resuming its downward trend. 
The Committee has indicated that the rate cuts have  lowered the probability of 
significantly undershooting the end-year inflation target. However, the tightness in 
financial conditions still persists to some extent,  and uncertainties regarding the impact 
of the problems in financial markets on the real ec onomy remain high, suggesting that 
downside risks still remain. The Central Bank will continue to take the necessary 
measures to contain the adverse effects of the glob al financial turmoil on the domestic 
economy, provided that they do not conflict with th e price stability objective. Looking 
forward, the Committee envisages that the next rate  cut may be measured, and that it 
may be necessary for the monetary policy to maintai n an easing bias for a considerable 
period. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance . 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
eight working days.  
 