No: 2009 - 17 
14 May 2009 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: May 14, 2009 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç, 
M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has deci ded to lower the policy 
rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate is decreased  from 9.75 percent to 
9.25 percent, while lending rate is decreased from 12.2 5 percent to 11.75 
percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing ra te between 4:00 p.m. – 
5:00 p.m. is decreased from 5.75 percent to 5.25 percent , while lending rate is 
decreased from 15.25 percent to 14.75 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturit y borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions is de creased from 11.25 
percent to 10.75 percent. 
 
Recent data releases point to a partial recovery in pri vate consumption demand. 
However, problems in international credit markets persist  and there are no significant 
signs of improvement in the outlook for global economy.  External demand remains 
weak while domestic investment demand continues to contract . These developments 
suggest that the economic activity and employment are no t likely to recover anytime 
soon. Therefore, downward pressures on inflation are ex pected to prevail for some time. 
Moreover, past declines in oil and other commodity price s inflation are likely to further 
contribute to disinflation in the near term. In light  of these assessments, the Committee 
believes that recent developments are consistent with the  outlook presented in the April 
Inflation Report and has decided to cut policy rates by 50 basis points. 
The Committee has indicated that the rate cuts have low ered the probability of 
significantly undershooting the medium term inflation targets. However, the tightness in 
financial conditions still persists to some extent, and unce rtainties regarding the impact 
of the problems in financial markets on the real economy  persist, suggesting that 
downside risks still remain. Looking forward, the Committ ee envisages that the next rate 
cut may be measured, and that it seems necessary for the m onetary policy to maintain 
an easing bias for a considerable period. 
The Central Bank will continue to take the necessary measu res to contain the 
adverse effects of the global financial turmoil on the domestic economy, provided that 
they do not conflict with the price stability objective.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
eight working days.  