No: 2009-12 
31 March 2009 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: March 19, 2009 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices decreased by 0.34 percent in February,  pushing inflation 
down to 7.73 percent year-on-year. The marked slowdow n in economic activity 
and the changes in oil and other commodity prices continu ed to help bring 
inflation down and curb short-term exchange rate pass-th rough. 
2. Energy prices dropped by 0.82 percent in February, and annual inflation in this 
subgroup eased to 13.74 percent, chiefly owing to fal ling natural gas and solid 
fuel prices. Yet, the exchange rate-driven sharp rise in  fuel and bottled gas 
prices limited the downtrend in energy price inflation . 
3. The rate of increase in unprocessed food prices was up by a very modest 0.85 
percent in February. Accordingly, after having soared b ecause of the sharp 
rise in vegetable prices over the past four months, unpr ocessed food price 
inflation slumped to 0.63 percent year-on-year owing to the dramatic decline in 
fresh fruit and vegetable prices. Meanwhile, processed f ood prices continued 
to decline at a faster pace. The group’s prices dropped by 0.68 percent month-
on-month, largely due to falling bread and grain pr ices. With the significant 
softening in both processed and unprocessed food prices, annual food and 
nonalcoholic beverages inflation fell to 6.16 percent. 
4. The annual rate of increase in processed food prices i s expected to slow down 
further in coming months. However, changes in vegetable  prices may cause a 
temporary spike in unprocessed food prices during March. T he Monetary 
Policy Committee (the Committee) noted that the anti cipated rise in 
unprocessed food prices, as well as the observed increase i n prices of 
tobacco products in March, would likely have an adverse i mpact on consumer 
inflation, yet will not cause any deterioration in th e underlying inflation trend as 
price hikes in both groups are expected to be short-lived . 
5. Annual inflation in goods excluding energy and foo d increased by 0.46 points 
from January to 5.20 percent in February on the back o f changes in clothing 
and gold prices. However, in the durables group (exclu ding gold), annual 
inflation went down by 0.18 points month-on-month. P roducer prices for 
durable goods fell for the third consecutive month, partly due to changes in 
import prices, while aggregate demand conditions contin ued to soften. As a result, exchange rate pass-through on prices of durable g oods remained low 
compared to previous periods.  
6. The reduction in the Special Consumption Tax (SCT)  in March is likely to have 
some downward pressure on the prices of durable goods in March and April, 
but is expected to be offset by price increases as the t ax cut expires in the 
middle of June. Therefore, the SCT tax cut is expected to have only a 
temporary direct impact on inflation. Similarly, the SCT tax cut may cause a 
temporary downward shift in core inflation indicator s as well.  
7. Services prices recorded the first monthly decline since the inception of the 
index, albeit a modest one, and the group’s annual in flation dropped by 0.62 
points from January to 9.27 percent in February. The f act that the slowdown 
was evident across all subcategories is viewed as a favorab le development. 
The continued fall in the rate of increase in services pri ces and other key price 
indicators suggests that underlying inflation is on a do wnward trend. 
8. Overall, the Committee expects annual consumer infla tion to rise temporarily 
in March owing to soaring unprocessed food prices, but the n to continue its 
downtrend. 
 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
9. Recent readings suggest that economic activity contin ues to weaken. 
Industrial production, which dropped by 21.3 percent y ear-on-year in January 
2009, displayed a sharp contraction from a month ago in  seasonally adjusted 
terms. Readings on capacity utilization, electricity consump tion and exports 
point to a further significant year-on-year decline in  industrial production in 
February. Seasonally adjusted data for January and Fe bruary indicate that 
economic activity continues to decline in the first quarte r. 
10. Recent data releases indicate that consumer sentimen t has recovered 
somewhat from a quarter ago but remains subdued. Altho ugh automobile 
sales and consumer confidence indices displayed a partial r ebound in the first 
months of 2009, these indicators remain at relatively depressed levels by 
historical standards. Low production figures despite rebou nding orders and 
sales reflect the ongoing depletion of inventories. 
11. Labor market readings confirm the sharp weakening of  economic activity. 
Between November 2008 and January 2009, unemployment  increased by 3 
points from a year earlier to 13.6 percent. In the sam e period, non-farm 
unemployment rose by 4.3 points to 17.3 percent. The Committee noted that 
the rise in unemployment is partly due to increased lab or force participation, 
but emphasized that the main driver was the slowdown i n employment growth. The number of people receiving unemployment benefits continued to rise in 
February and it is evident that it will take some tim e for economic activity to 
recover. These developments suggest that unemployment w ill increase further 
during the first quarter. On balance, the downward p ressure on unit labor costs 
will continue. 
12. Foreign demand continues to remain weak in the fir st quarter. Although data 
released by the Turkish Exporters’ Assembly and leading indicators for export 
orders indicate no further deterioration in February and March, the Committee, 
in view of the global economic outlook, expects that agg regate demand is not 
likely to recover soon. 
 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
13. Recent monetary and fiscal policy actions are likely to  provide some stimulus 
to domestic demand, accelerating the depletion of inven tories and thus 
partially adding to the exchange rate pass-through on the prices of durable 
goods. However, the Committee underscored that monetar y policy would not 
react to changes in relative prices stemming from exchan ge rate movements, 
as long as it does not lead to a deterioration in over all price setting behavior. 
Second round effects should not be a source of concern at this point, given 
the significant weakness in non-farm employment and the economic outlook.  
14. The Committee indicated that the rate cuts so fa r had lowered the probability 
of significantly undershooting the end-year inflatio n target, and hence the next 
rate cut might be measured. However, it was also stated that tightness in 
financial conditions still persisted to some extent, and u ncertainties regarding 
the impact of financial turbulence on the real economy  remained high, 
suggesting that downside risks still remained. Although con sumer credits and 
other domestic demand indicators suggest a slight rebound,  business loans 
continue to stagnate.  
15. Problems in international credit markets persist whil e forecasts of global 
economic growth have been consistently revised downwards.  The global 
economic outlook continues to deteriorate and the recession  is expected to be 
long lasting. In this respect, the Committee members ind icated that the 
likelihood of an early recovery in the global economy , envisaged as an 
alternative scenario in the January Inflation Report, had almost diminished. 
Therefore, expecting that economic activity is not like ly to recover anytime 
soon, the Committee stated that it might be necessary f or monetary policy to 
maintain an easing bias for a considerable period. 
16. The Committee members suggested that the reduced gl obal appetite for risk 
and the expected slowdown in capital flows to emerging markets could be taken into account regarding monetary policy decisions. Y et, it was 
emphasized that the sharp contraction in investment dem and and the rapidly 
shrinking current account deficit led to a significant dro p in financing 
requirements.  
17. The Committee members have noted that budget rev enues have been 
declining in line with the slowdown in economic activity while expenditures 
have been accelerating due to counter cyclical fiscal pol icy. It was stated that 
some easing in fiscal policy is understandable under the current conditions. 
However, the Committee indicated that the increasing f inancing requirement of 
the government might weaken the impact of monetary po licy decisions on 
economic activity. Accordingly, in order to reap the gai ns from short-term 
expansionary fiscal policy, it is important to commit t o a credible medium-term 
fiscal framework that would ensure debt sustainability an d a sound overall 
fiscal position. 
18. The Central Bank will continue to take the necessary  measures to contain the 
adverse effects of the global financial turmoil on the  domestic economy, 
provided that they do not conflict with the price stabi lity objective. Prudent 
monetary policy is necessary but not sufficient to maintai n the resilience of the 
economy against the global crisis. Therefore, strengtheni ng the commitment to 
fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda is also critical for facilitating 
expectations management and for enhancing the simulativ e impact of the 
monetary accommodation. In this respect, commitment to th e European Union 
accession process, and timely implementation and revision o f the structural 
reforms envisaged in the Medium Term Program remain t o be of utmost 
importance. 
 
 