No: 2009 – 29 
             01 October 2009 
    
    SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETIN G  
    Meeting Date: September 17, 2009 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç, 
M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
  Inflation Developments  
1. Consumer prices decreased by 0.30 percent in Aug ust, bringing inflation down 
to 5.33 percent year-on-year. Core inflation measur es remained low, while the 
annual rate of increase in the prices of services c ontinued to fall steadily. 
2. The rate of increase in food prices dropped by 1 .67 percentage points month-
on-month to 6.83 percent year-on-year, on the back of easing unprocessed 
food prices, owing to falling vegetable and fruit p rices. In the processed food 
category, prices continued to decline year-on-year,  however, annual inflation 
across this category is likely to increase owing to  base effects in coming 
months. 
3. Energy prices increased by 1.88 percent in Augus t. Fuel prices jumped by 
5.02 percent due to the lagged impact of the mid-Ju ly Special Consumption 
Tax hike and rising oil prices. Moreover, the incre ase in tap water rates drove 
energy prices higher. 
4. The annual rate of increase in the prices of goo ds excluding energy and food 
climbed to 5.70 percent in August, owing to the ris e in annual clothing inflation 
and the monthly increase (1.83 percent) in prices o f durable goods (excluding 
gold) and tobacco products. The seasonal discounts on clothing prices have 
been more modest than a year earlier because of the  relative increase in 
clothing demand. Meanwhile, the annual inflation in  durable goods (excluding 
gold) increased to –1.71 percent amid rising prices  of white goods and 
automobiles. It should be noted that the tax cuts a re due to expire in October, 
which will likely put upward pressure on annual dur able goods inflation in the 
upcoming period. 
5. Given the weak state of domestic demand and the gradual removal of the high 
base effect of the past supply shocks, the steady f all in services prices over 
the past year continued into August, bringing the i nflation rate in this category 
down to 5.59 percent year-on-year. Across subcatego ries, inflation in transport services, rents, as well as restaurants and hotels continued to fall gradually. 
Annual services inflation is expected to edge furth er down over the short run. 
6. Overall, the Monetary Policy Committee (the Comm ittee) noted that underlying 
inflation continues to hover around low levels.   
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation  
7. Second quarter national accounts data are consis tent with the outlook 
discussed in the July Inflation Report. Gross Domes tic Product (GDP) 
continued to decline year-on-year, but rose sharply  quarter-on-quarter in 
seasonally adjusted terms, signaling that the econo mic contraction since the 
second quarter of 2008 has ended. Domestic demand i ncreased on rising 
private consumption during the second quarter, and net exports continued to 
register a positive contribution to growth, albeit more modestly.  
8. As stated in the Central Bank of Turkey’s previo us publications and 
announcements, the Committee reiterated that consum er spending was 
mainly boosted by the fiscal stimulus packages, and  thus the observed 
recovery may reflect transitory features. Among maj or spending categories, 
the demand for goods that benefited from the fiscal  measures recovered 
rapidly during the second quarter: spending on furn iture, household 
appliances and care, as well as transport and commu nications rose markedly 
quarter-on-quarter in seasonally adjusted terms. By  contrast, the demand for 
categories that were not affected by the fiscal inc entives remained flat. 
9. Consumption demand, after having increased marke dly during the second 
quarter, is expected to display a weaker course in the third quarter. In fact, 
indicators including the sales of white goods, the quantity of imported 
consumer goods, consumption indices and automobile sales are running 
below their second quarter levels in seasonally adj usted terms. Moreover, the 
indicators of market orders and consumer confidence  from the Business 
Tendency Survey seem to reinforce this outlook. 
10. Domestic investment demand remains weak. Despit e the marked run-up in 
consumer demand during the second quarter, private machinery and 
equipment investments continued to fall quarterly, indicating that demand 
uncertainty remains strong over the upcoming period s. Imports of capital 
goods declined in July from a quarter earlier, whil e the Business Tendency 
Survey indicator of expected future fixed capital i nvestment spending points to 
a further year-on-year decline in private sector in vestments. The Committee 
noted that low capacity utilization rates and uncer tainties over aggregate 
demand will likely further weigh down on investment  demand. 11. Foreign demand continues to be weak. The export  quantity index continued to 
fall year-on-year in July, but increased sharply mo nth-on-month in seasonally 
adjusted terms. Leading indicators suggest that exp orts continued to grow in 
August and September, albeit at a slower pace. The Committee noted that 
exports are expected to recover gradually, matching  the pace of global 
economic recovery, and reemphasized that foreign de mand is therefore likely 
to remain anemic for quite some time. 
12. In July, industrial production increased month- on-month in seasonally adjusted 
terms, running above its second quarter average. Th e uptrend in capacity 
utilization rates since April continued into August . The manufacturing industry 
capacity utilization rate and recent export data su ggest that the moderate 
recovery in industrial production is likely to cont inue into August and 
September. 
13. Uncertainties regarding aggregate demand remain  high and continue to 
adversely affect labor markets. Specifically, labor  market conditions do not 
display a significant improvement. During May-July,  non-farm employment 
dropped by 2.5 percent year-on-year, while non-farm  unemployment increased 
by 4.5 percentage points to 16.4 percent. In season ally adjusted terms, while 
non-farm unemployment fell slightly quarter-on-quar ter, the decline was 
because of a drop in labor participation rate rathe r than a recovery in 
employment. Moreover, employment losses are still a pparent across industrial 
sectors in seasonally adjusted terms, indicating th at the labor market has yet 
to recover. Looking ahead, leading indicators do no t point to a marked 
recovery in employment conditions during the third quarter. 
 
  Monetary Policy and Risks 
14. Committee members have indicated that the futur e course of monetary policy 
will largely depend on the strength of the recovery  in economic activity. 
Although second quarter GDP figures seem to reflect  a bounce-back in private 
consumption, inspection of the subcomponents reveal s that the increase in 
consumption is confined to goods that were subject to tax incentives within the 
fiscal package, suggesting that a durable recovery has yet to materialize. As a 
matter of fact, recent data releases indicate that,  in line with the Committee’s 
previous assessments, the ongoing recovery in econo mic activity will be 
gradual and protracted. Accordingly, resource utili zation in the economy is 
anticipated to stay below potential for an extended  period, and therefore, in 
line with the perspective outlined in the Inflation  Report, inflation is expected to 
remain at low levels for a long period of time. 
15. Provided that the improvements in global risk p erceptions continue, the 
Committee expects that the cumulative policy rate c uts implemented since November 2008 would begin to have an effect on cred it markets over the 
forthcoming period. In this context, consumer loan rates have been falling 
steadily since the publication of the July Inflatio n Report. Also during this 
period, banks’ willingness to extend credits have b een increasing markedly, 
and tightness in financial conditions have been eas ing. These developments 
suggest that the credit channel would start to be m ore effective going forward.  
16. However, the weakness in labor markets is ongoi ng and lingering problems 
across the global economy have not been resolved co mpletely, suggesting 
that there are still uncertainties regarding the st rength of the recovery. In this 
respect, the Committee members stated that the impr ovement in credit 
conditions would not in itself be enough to end the  easing cycle. Yet, given the 
increased perceptions that the economy had reached a turning point, it was 
concluded that a slowdown in the pace of rate cuts might be considered, 
keeping the options open depending on incoming info rmation. 
17. Overall, the Committee has reiterated that it w ould be necessary for monetary 
policy to maintain an easing bias for a long period  of time. The size and the 
duration of the rate cuts would depend on the pace of the recovery in 
economic activity.  
18. Another factor affecting the outlook for moneta ry policy would be changes in 
risk perceptions. The global crisis has highlighted  the resilience of the Turkish 
financial system, leading to an improvement of our relative creditworthiness. 
Provided that the global risk appetite continues to  improve in the forthcoming 
period, this could lead to a decline in imported in flation through the portfolio 
channel, increasing the probability of significantl y undershooting the inflation 
targets. Under such circumstances, the Central Bank  of Turkey (CBT) would 
react by extending the easing cycle more than was e nvisaged in the Inflation 
Report.    
19. An important factor that may affect the risk pr emium is fiscal policy. Should the 
framework outlined in the Medium Term Program be su pported by structural 
adjustments which enhance fiscal discipline, the im provements in sovereign 
credit risk might continue, which in turn, would in crease the probability of a 
further decline in interest rates. In sum, further improvements in the risk 
premium may lead to a longer rate cut cycle. 
20. The CBT has been taking the necessary measures at its disposal to contain 
the adverse effects of the global crisis on the dom estic economy. Monetary 
policy in the past year has focused on alleviating the impact of the global 
financial crisis on the economic activity. In this respect, the CBT has delivered 
sizeable cuts in policy rates, while providing liqu idity support to facilitate the 
smooth operation of credit and financial markets. P rudent monetary policy is 
necessary but not sufficient to maintain the resili ence of the economy against the global crisis. Therefore, strengthening the com mitment to fiscal discipline 
and the structural reform agenda is also critical f or facilitating expectations 
management and for supporting the effectiveness of the monetary policy 
decisions. In this respect, timely implementation o f the structural reforms 
envisaged by the Medium Term Program and European U nion accession 
process remains to be of utmost importance. 
 