No:2009 – 26          18 August 2009 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: August 18, 2009 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç, 
M. Đbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has d ecided to lower the policy 
rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate is decr eased from 8.25 percent to 
7.75 percent, while lending rate is decreased from 10.75 percent to 10.25 
percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate between 4:00 p.m. – 
5:00 p.m. is decreased from 4.25 percent to 3.75 pe rcent, while lending rate is 
decreased from 13.75 percent to 13.25 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week matu rity borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions is decreased from 9.75 
percent to 9.25 percent. 
 
Recent data releases indicate that the ongoing reco very in economic activity will 
be gradual and protracted. External demand remains weak, domestic investment 
demand continues to contract, and labor market cond itions do not display a significant 
improvement. Moreover, recent developments have inc reased the uncertainty regarding 
the strength of the consumption recovery. Therefore , in line with the perspective 
outlined in the Inflation Report, inflation is expe cted to remain at low levels for a long 
period of time. 
The tightness in financial conditions continues to some extent, and uncertainties 
regarding the impact of the problems in financial m arkets on the real economy persist, 
suggesting that downside risks still remain. Theref ore, the Committee reiterates that it 
will be necessary for monetary policy to maintain a n easing bias for a long period of 
time and envisages that further measured rate cuts will be necessary in the short term 
unless there is a robust recovery in the economic a ctivity. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance . 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
eight working days.  
 