 
No 2009 – 21  26 June 2009  
 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: June 16, 2009 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices increased by 0.64 percent in May , while inflation fell to 5.24 
percent year-on-year. Inflation was down across all  subcategories, with 
services prices registering an even more pronounced  deceleration. Moreover, 
the core inflation measures indicate that underlyin g inflation remains around 
historic lows. 
2. Annual unprocessed food inflation continued to t rend upward in May amid 
accelerating fruit prices. After having declined as  low as 0.63 percent in 
February, annual unprocessed food inflation spiked to 13.59 percent in May, 
and is likely to remain volatile in coming months. Meanwhile, after hitting a 
record 25.50 percent in July 2008—amid supply short ages and rising import 
prices—annual processed food inflation went down to  2.68 percent in May with 
the reversal of previous unfavorable developments. Accordingly, inflation in 
food and nonalcoholic beverages dropped to 7.63 per cent year-on-year. 
3. Annual energy inflation declined by 3.1 percenta ge points to 6.22 percent in 
May due to the significant  reduction in natural ga s tariffs and the ongoing fall 
in solid fuel prices since December. Given the remo val of the base effect from 
the marked increase in all subcategories of energy— particularly in electricity 
and natural gas—during July and August 2008, annual  energy inflation is 
expected to decelerate further in the short run. Ho wever, higher crude oil 
prices are likely to limit the downtrend in energy inflation. 
4. Annual inflation in goods excluding energy and f ood fell to 1.44 percent in May, 
owing to the decline in underlying inflation, the s lower price increases for the 
latest season of clothing and footwear compared to a year earlier, and the high 
base in furniture prices from a year ago. The impac t of the tax adjustments in 
June on core goods inflation would depend on the ex tent to which they are 
passed through prices.  
5. Services inflation continued to slow down in May , falling by 0.83 percentage 
points to 6.78 percent year-on-year. The rate of in crease of services prices 
decelerated across all subcategories. Meanwhile, re nt inflation moderated further, down to 9.49 percent year-on-year. Given t he softening in domestic 
demand, annual services inflation is expected to ed ge further down in coming 
months.  
6. Overall, the Monetary Policy Committee (the Comm ittee) expects annual 
inflation to rise in June due to the base effect an d the tax adjustments. 
However, the increase in inflation is seen to be te mporary given the one-off 
nature of the factors affecting June inflation. 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
7. Recent data releases point to a partial recovery  in economic activity. In 
seasonally adjusted terms, the industrial productio n index in April and the 
capacity utilization rate in May indicate that the downward trend in production 
that began in the second quarter of 2008 ended duri ng the second quarter of 
2009. While industrial production plummeted by 18.5  percent year-on-year, the 
index rose by 0.5 percent month-on-month in seasona lly adjusted terms in 
April. Furthermore, the private sector’s capacity u tilization rate in seasonally 
adjusted terms was up by 1.0 percentage point durin g April-May period 
compared to the first quarter. Nonetheless, the Com mittee members noted 
that most of the recent increases in economic activ ity were attributable to the 
short-term effects of the previously implemented fi scal measures. The 
Committee indicated that there needs to be a robust  revival in consumer 
demand in order for the increases in the capacity u tilization rate to be 
sustainable over the medium term. 
8. Although consumer demand continued to rise in Ap ril and in May, it remains to 
be seen whether this will turn into a solid recover y. The Committee noted that 
consumer demand was stronger in the second quarter than in the first quarter 
of the year in seasonally adjusted terms. Specifica lly, domestic automobile 
sales, which were largely supported by the tax cuts , continued to rise in May in 
seasonally adjusted terms, leading to an increase b oth in imports and 
domestic production. The fiscal package also affect ed the domestic sales of 
white goods, which accelerated during March and Apr il. Similarly, consumption 
indices remained elevated in April and May after ma rkedly rising during March. 
Having started to rebound in February, the producti on of chemicals and 
furniture production, largely intended for the dome stic market, continued to 
recover slightly in April. 
9. Despite having fallen significantly year-on-year , imports of consumer goods 
increased in seasonally adjusted terms during March  and April, particularly 
owing to the rebound in imports of passenger cars o n the back of the tax cut 
introduced by the fiscal package. In contrast, the recovery in consumer non-
durable imports was quite limited. 10. Domestic investment demand continues to contrac t. The production of capital 
goods fell in April in seasonally adjusted terms, w hile there has been some 
recovery in capital goods imports since February. A ccording to both production 
and import figures, the investment demand for machi nery and equipment is 
expected to slump further year-on-year in the secon d quarter. Demand 
uncertainty and lower capacity utilization continue  to suppress fixed capital 
investments. Results of the Business Survey indicat e that recently investment 
appetite continued to remain weak, although the pac e of deterioration has 
slowed down during April and May. The Committee ind icated that the current 
trend in investment demand is far from signaling a robust economic recovery. 
11. Foreign demand remains weak. The export quantit y index dropped by 13.3 
percent year-on-year in April. Coincident indicator s suggest that exports 
decreased by about 40 percent year-on-year in May i n US dollar terms. The 
Committee noted that the sharp contraction in expor ts during May can be 
partly attributed to base effects, as the seasonall y adjusted data shows that 
exports have remained flat since October 2008. 
12. The softening of economic activity in general, and investment demand in 
particular, continues to have a dampening effect on  employment. Although 
non-farm unemployment declined to 18.9 percent in M arch 2009 after hitting 
19.3 percent during the first quarter of 2009, it c ontinued to rise in seasonally 
adjusted terms. Applications for unemployment benef its in April and May 
suggest that non-farm unemployment may continue to rise in the second 
quarter in seasonally adjusted terms. The Committee  expects that the high 
rate of unemployment would restrain unit labor cost s and domestic demand in 
the foreseeable future. 
Monetary Policy and Risks  
13. The Committee believes that resolving the probl ems in the global economy is 
likely to take a considerable period of time. Altho ugh recent data releases 
indicate that the worst may be over, the recovery i s expected to be protracted 
given credit market problems and rising unemploymen t rates.  
14. In light of these assessments, the Committee ex pects that the recovery in 
domestic economic activity would be gradual, and la bor market conditions 
would not improve anytime soon. Hence, the inflatio n rate is expected to 
remain at low levels in the forthcoming period. Whi le inflation could rise in 
June due to tax hikes and base effects, this increa se is expected to be 
temporary. 
15. Changes in monetary conditions affect economic activity and inflation with a 
lag. Therefore, given the cumulative easing in mone tary policy since November 2008, the Committee envisages that the nex t rate cut may be 
measured. 
16. However, the tightness in financial conditions still persist to some extent, and 
uncertainties regarding the impact of the problems across financial markets on 
the real economy are ongoing, suggesting that downs ide risks still remain. 
Accordingly, it seems necessary for monetary policy  to maintain an easing 
bias for a considerable period of time. 
17. Although downside risks are still more signific ant, recent signs of recovery in 
economic activity should not be discarded. Accordin gly, the Committee will 
consider a deceleration in the pace of rate cuts or  a pause should the 
indications of an improvement in economic activity point to a robust recovery. 
18. The Committee also assessed current and project ed Turkish lira liquidity 
conditions. To facilitate the liquidity management of banks and to enhance the 
transmission of monetary policy, the Committee appr oved the use of repos up 
to three-month maturity as needed, in addition to t he main one-week repo 
funding instrument. 
19. The Committee indicated that despite recent inc reases, commodity prices are 
still at low levels relative to last year, and ther efore imported input costs did 
not exert significant pressure on inflation at this  point. At the same time, the 
Committee members noted that the possible future de mand increases for 
commodities by emerging economies, including China and India, made 
commodity prices very sensitive to speculation. The refore, potential 
commodity price developments could present risks to  inflation over the 
medium term.  
20. Another major factor affecting inflation and th e monetary policy outlook is the 
stance of fiscal policy. Revenues continue to decli ne in line with the slowdown 
in economic activity, while expenditures rise owing  to countercyclical fiscal 
policy, leading to a widening in the budget deficit . In this context, the 
increasing financing requirement of the government might weaken the 
favorable impact of monetary policy decisions on ec onomic activity. Given 
these developments, the Committee members once agai n emphasized that, in 
order to reap the gains from short-term expansionar y fiscal policy, it was 
important to commit to a credible medium-term fisca l framework that would 
underpin fiscal discipline and debt sustainability.  
21. While necessary, prudent monetary policy is not  sufficient to support the 
resilience of the economy against the global crisis . Therefore, strengthening 
the commitment to fiscal discipline and the structu ral reform agenda is also 
critical for facilitating expectations management a nd for supporting the 
effectiveness of the monetary policy decisions. In this respect, commitment to the European Union accession process, and timely im plementation of the 
structural reforms envisaged in the Pre-Accession E conomic Program remain 
to be of utmost importance. 
 