No: 2009 – 23               28 July 2009 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: July 16, 2009 
 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices increased by 0.11 percent in June, brin ging inflation up to 
5.73 percent year-on-year. The rise in inflation was p rimarily driven by the 
base effect from unprocessed food prices and tax adjustment s on some 
durable goods. However, excluding the contributions of these factors, 
underlying inflation continues to trend down, hoverin g around historic lows. 
2. Annual unprocessed food inflation increased in June ma inly on account of the 
low base effect. It should be recalled that unprocessed fo od prices had 
dropped by about 10 percent in June 2008 at a faster p ace than seasonal 
averages, largely owing to the decline in exports for fruits and vegetables. 
Having fallen at a more modest pace in June 2009, unpr ocessed food prices 
registered an annual rate of increase of 22.35 percent,  partly owing to the 
increase in foreign demand for fruits and vegetables sin ce the final quarter of 
2008. After hitting an average of 25.2 percent year- on-year in the first quarter, 
the growth in export quantity for fruits and vegetab les climbed to about 35 
percent during April and May. Meanwhile, processed food  prices continued to 
ease in June, running close to year-ago levels. Despite t he benign outlook for 
processed food prices, annual inflation in food and nona lcoholic beverages 
group rose to 9.68 percent owing to developments in un processed food prices.   
3. Energy prices rose by 1.63 percent in June on the back of rising fuel and 
bottled gas prices amid higher oil prices. Despite these p rice hikes, the annual 
rate of increase in energy prices continued to decline, b ringing energy inflation 
down to 6.1 percent year-on-year. Fuel prices declined during the first half of 
July, owing to regulatory measures and the fall in oil  prices, before rising again 
on the back of special consumption tax (SCT) hike on major  fuel products and 
the rise in oil prices. On balance, monthly average of fuel prices in July are 
expected to be below average fuel prices in June. Along  with the removal of 
the high base effect from the sharp increase in electricit y tariffs a year ago, 
annual energy inflation is expected to decline further  in July. 
4. Although annual inflation in goods excluding energy a nd food rose in June, it 
still remains low at 1.63 percent. Among the subcategori es, clothing prices 
remained below year-ago levels. Prices of durable good s (excluding gold) 
were up 2.04 percent month-on-month due to phased-out  tax cuts, with a particular boost from rising automobile prices. It should  be noted that changes 
in tax rates are likely to put further upward pressure on core goods inflation in 
July and October. In addition, the surge in prices of to bacco products (fuelled 
by minimum lump-sum tax adjustments) is likely to push CP I inflation up by 
around 0.54 percentage points in July. On balance, the annual rate of increase 
in prices of goods excluding food and energy is expected to edge up in the 
second half of 2009.  
5. The rate of increase in services prices continued to slow  down amid 
weakening domestic demand. Services inflation fell by 0. 51 percentage points 
month-on-month to an all-time low of 6.27 percent ye ar-on-year. Annual 
inflation decelerated across all major subcategories. In p articular, rent inflation 
eased further, down to 8.74 percent year-on-year. Accor dingly, services prices 
are expected to edge further down in coming months. 
6. Overall, despite some potential fluctuations owing t o tax hikes and base 
effects, the Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee)  expects inflation to 
remain low during the upcoming period.  
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
7. First-quarter national accounts data confirmed the de epening of the economic 
contraction. During the first quarter, gross domestic prod uct (GDP) plummeted 
by 13.8 percent year-on-year and posted a steep quarte rly decline in 
seasonally adjusted terms. The global crisis had a growing  impact on the labor 
market, while private domestic demand displayed a sharp contraction. 
However, with the marked slowdown in imports, net expo rts registered a 
positive contribution to growth. 
8. Recent data releases point to a partial recovery in economic activity. Despite 
having slumped by 17.4 percent year-on-year, industria l production increased 
in seasonally adjusted terms in May. However, the June d ata on capacity 
utilization suggests that the pace of recovery in economi c activity remains 
weak. The Committee noted that even though the downt rend in industrial 
production since the second quarter of 2008 appears to ha ve receded in 
seasonally adjusted terms, the outlook for growth remain s anemic. 
9. Consumption indices seem to indicate a modest revitali zation during the 
second quarter. The production of consumer goods rose quar ter-on-quarter, 
particularly regarding goods most affected by the tax cu ts. Similarly, imports of 
consumer goods increased on the back of the robust demand f or passenger 
cars. On balance, the Committee indicated that the second -quarter recovery in 
private consumption demand is uneven and, currently, no t of a durable nature. 10. Domestic investment demand continues to weaken. The p roduction of capital 
goods dropped by 38.7 percent year-on-year during Apr il-May and fell below 
its quarter-ago average in seasonally adjusted terms. Me anwhile, the private 
investment demand for machinery and equipment has plun ged further in the 
second quarter both in quarterly and yearly terms, alt hough there has been 
some rebound in the demand for imported capital goods.  
11. Foreign demand remains weak. The export quantity index was down 19 
percent year-on-year during April-May. The recent rea dings of the export 
quantity index (excluding gold) point to a very slow and limited growth of 
underlying exports in seasonally adjusted terms, which is consistent with the 
current global growth outlook. Ongoing weakness regardin g the leading 
indicators for economic activity across European countries–com prising 
Turkey’s largest export destinations–increases the likelihoo d of a protracted 
recovery in foreign demand. 
12. The demand uncertainty fuelled by the global econ omic downturn has 
prompted firms to embrace a more cautious stance regardin g production 
activities. In this context, employment prospects are unli kely to improve soon 
given the low rates of capacity utilization and the de cline in investment 
sentiment. The 2009 March-May data indicate that non-f arm employment 
continues to fall, while both male and female labor f orce participation rates rise 
further. Thus, non-farm unemployment soared to 18.2 p ercent during March-
May, up by 5.9 percentage points from a year earlier.  While applications for 
unemployment benefits slowed in June compared with the first quarter, they 
were significantly above their year-ago level. These d evelopments suggest 
that non-farm unemployment has remained at elevated levels in the second 
quarter. 
 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
13. In light of these assessments, the Committee noted th at, although there were 
signs of a partial improvement in domestic consumption, i ts strength and 
durability remains to be seen. It is expected that dema nd uncertainty and low 
levels of resource utilization will continue to weigh d own on investment 
spending and employment, while high unemployment wil l continue to contain 
private consumption demand. Therefore, inflation is ex pected to remain at low 
levels for a long period of time. 
14. The tightness in financial conditions continues to some  extent, and 
uncertainties regarding the impact of the problems in f inancial markets on the 
real economy persist, suggesting that downside risks still re main. Therefore, 
the Committee reiterated that it would be necessary fo r monetary policy to maintain an easing bias for a long period of time and  envisaged that further 
measured rate cuts would be necessary in the near term un less a robust 
recovery were observed in the economic activity. 
15. The Committee members believe that global intere st rates are likely to remain 
at low levels for an extended period, given the signi ficant slowdown in growth 
and rising saving rates. The Committee therefore indica ted that this view 
should be emphasized more forcefully to align market yi elds closer with future 
policy intentions. 
16. Given the increased perceptions that low growth and  low interest rates will 
persist for an extended period, the Committee members assessed that, it 
would be possible to provide more solid information re garding the policy 
stance in the upcoming Inflation Report (due on July 29th ). Accordingly, the 
Committee decided to provide a perspective on the poli cy rate assumptions 
for the short-term, medium-term, and long-term that underlies the forecasts in 
the Inflation Report. 
17. The Committee reemphasized the important role of  global developments as 
well as fiscal policy for the inflation and monetary po licy outlook. The 
Committee members indicated that providing explicit sta tements in the 
Inflation Report regarding the likely response of mone tary policy under 
alternative scenarios would be useful in containing uncer tainties and guiding 
market expectations. 
18. Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not sufficien t to maintain the 
resilience of the economy against the global crisis. There fore, strengthening 
the commitment to fiscal discipline and the structural ref orm agenda is also 
critical for facilitating expectations management and fo r supporting the 
effectiveness of the monetary policy decisions. In this resp ect, timely 
implementation of the structural reforms in the context  of the European Union 
accession process remains to be of utmost importance. 