No: 2009 – 36 
17 December 2009 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: December 17, 2009 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç, 
M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has deci ded to keep policy rates 
unchanged as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 6.50 pe rcent, lending rate at 9 
percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00  p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing 
rate at 2.50 percent, lending rate at 12 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity  borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions at 8 p ercent. 
 
Recent data releases indicate a moderate pace of recovery in the economic activity. 
However, there are still uncertainties regarding the ag gregate demand, and the 
employment conditions are expected to take a long time t o fully recover. Therefore, 
resource utilization, hence inflation, is expected to stay  around low levels in the medium 
term. The Committee has stated that strong base effects w ould be observed in forthcoming 
periods. This would lead to a significant increase in ann ual inflation, especially in 
December, yet core inflation would remain at low level s. 
The Committee notes that the cumulative policy rate cuts implemented since 
November 2008 and the improvements in global risk percept ions have started to exert 
favorable effects on credit markets. However, lingering pr oblems across the global 
economy are not resolved completely and there are still uncertainties regarding the 
strength of the recovery. Accordingly, in line with the policy stance presented in the Inflation 
Report, the Committee has emphasized that it would be  necessary to keep policy rates at 
low levels for a long period of time. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
eight working days.  