No: 2009 – 32 
27 October 2009 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: October 15, 2009 
 
 
  Inflation Developments  
1. Consumer prices increased by 0.39 percent in Sep tember, while inflation 
declined to 5.27 percent year-on-year. Core inflati on measures remained 
subdued, whereas the annual rate of increase in ser vices prices continued to 
fall steadily.  
2. Annual inflation in food prices dropped slightly  over the month to 6.79 percent. 
The favorable course of fruit and vegetable prices during the past two months 
continued into September, while meat prices acceler ated further. Taken 
together, unprocessed food inflation eased to 16.70  percent year-on-year. In 
the processed food category, prices continued to fa ll year-on-year. Looking 
ahead, fruit and vegetable prices are expected to p ick up owing to seasonal 
factors in October, while processed food prices are  likely to remain on the 
decline.  
3. Energy prices rose by 0.63 percent in September amid rising tap water rates 
and bottled gas prices. Accordingly, the rate of in crease in energy prices 
climbed to 2.01 percent year-on-year. The hike in e lectricity tariffs, effective 
October 1, would add about 0.4 percentage points to  CPI inflation. 
4. The annual rate of increase in prices of goods e xcluding energy and food 
declined to 5.52 percent, owing to ongoing discount s on clothing and footwear 
in September, in contrast with previous years. In t he durable goods (excluding 
gold) category, prices rose by 0.20 percent in Sept ember, and inflation 
increased to –1.37 percent year-on-year. It should be noted that prices of 
durable goods are likely to rise markedly in Octobe r following the expiration of 
temporary cuts in Special Consumption Tax (SCT) and  Value Added Tax 
(VAT). 
5. Annual services inflation continued to fall in S eptember, down to 5.26 percent, 
the lowest level in recent history. The drop was pa rticularly evident in rental 
and transport services inflation. Under current dom estic demand conditions, 
annual services inflation is expected to edge furth er down in coming months, 
albeit at a more modest pace. 
6. Overall, the Monetary Policy Committee (the Comm ittee) expects consumer 
prices to accelerate temporarily in October due to seasonal increases in food and clothing prices, the hike in electricity tariff s and tax adjustments on 
durable goods. However, the Committee expects that annual inflation would 
continue to hover around low levels. 
 
 Factors Affecting Inflation 
7. In line with the Committee’s previous assessment s, recent data releases 
indicate that the ongoing recovery in economic acti vity would be gradual and 
protracted. During July-August, industrial producti on declined by 7.7 percent 
year-on-year, yet registered a modest increase over  the second quarter in 
seasonally adjusted terms. Moreover, September’s ca pacity utilization data do 
not point to an acceleration in production growth. Therefore, the Committee 
noted that capacity utilization rates are not likel y to revert back to historical 
averages over the short run.  
8. Second quarter national accounts data confirm th at the fiscal stimulus-driven 
recovery in domestic demand has been confined to ce rtain goods categories, 
and therefore is likely to be transitory as previou sly stated. This outlook is also 
supported by third-quarter indicators. The ongoing weakening of the demand 
for non-durable goods is especially noteworthy, cau sing consumer goods 
production to dip below its second quarter average during July-August in 
seasonally adjusted terms. Similarly, imports of co nsumer goods were down 
during July-August compared to the previous quarter . Accordingly, having 
increased markedly during the second quarter, consu mption demand is 
expected to display a weaker course in the third qu arter. 
9. Domestic investment demand remains weak. During July-August, the 
production of capital goods was up from the second quarter, whereas the 
imports of capital goods remained flat. Excluding t ransport vehicles, the 
production of capital goods has also continued alon g a flat trend. Thus, the 
Committee noted that the third quarter rise in the production of capital goods 
has largely been the result of tax cuts, rather tha n a rebound in investment 
demand.  
10. Foreign demand remains weak. Growth forecasts, particularly for the euro 
area, point to a more positive outlook for foreign demand over the short term 
as of September, and expectations about the speed o f the medium-term 
recovery have slightly improved, compared with the July Inflation Report. 
Recent export figures are consistent with this outl ook. The export quantity 
index rose sharply quarter-on-quarter during July-A ugust in seasonally 
adjusted terms, but fell by 7.6 percent year-on-yea r. The medium-term outlook 
for global growth suggests that it would take a lon g time for the GDP to reach 
its pre-crisis levels across advanced economies. Th is outlook points to a gradual narrowing of output gaps across advanced ec onomies, implying a 
sluggish recovery of exports over the near term. Ac cordingly, the Committee 
reiterated that foreign demand is likely to continu e to weigh down on 
aggregate demand for quite some time. 
11. The June-August data signal that non-farm emplo yment has ceased to 
contract during the third quarter. During this peri od, despite having declined by 
1.9 percent year-on-year, non-farm employment incre ased in seasonally 
adjusted terms for the first time since the second quarter of 2008, driving 
unemployment down from the second quarter in season ally adjusted terms. 
The Committee agreed that, although employment indi cators show some 
improvement, it remains to be seen whether this wou ld turn into a robust 
recovery across the labor market. 
12. The lack of a clear sign of durable global reco very and the ongoing uncertainty 
about aggregate demand continues to cause companies  to operate at low 
capacity levels. In addition to low capacity utiliz ation and employment rates, 
per capita hours worked also hovers below pre-crisi s levels. The Committee 
expects the sluggish resource utilization and the r esulting idle capacity to 
continue to adversely affect investment and employm ent decisions. On 
balance, labor market conditions are likely to rema in a drag on domestic 
demand, and thereby expected to continue supporting  the decline in inflation. 
Therefore, inflation is expected to remain at low l evels for a long period of 
time. 
 
 Monetary Policy and Risks 
13. The policy rate cuts implemented since November  2008, and the 
improvements in global risk perceptions have starte d to have favorable effects 
on credit markets. In fact, consumer loan rates, wh ich were reacting rather 
sluggishly to the policy rate cuts, have displayed a significant decline in this 
period. Consequently, housing loans have displayed a stable upward trend 
since September. More generally, the recovery in cr edit markets is expected to 
continue throughout the last quarter. However, the effectiveness of the credit 
channel in supporting economic activity has been so mewhat restrained owing 
to the ongoing tightness in lending standards for t he small- and medium-sized 
enterprises. In this respect, the Committee, after taking liquidity conditions into 
consideration, has taken the view hat a limited red uction in Turkish Lira 
reserve requirements would alleviate the tightness in credit conditions, and 
thus enhance the effectiveness of the expansionary monetary policy. 
14. While the Committee members noted the improveme nts in credit and labor 
markets, they have come to the conclusion that thes e developments alone were not sufficient to end the easing cycle. Yet, g iven the increased 
perceptions that the economy had passed its turning  point, it was indicated 
that a slowdown in the pace of the rate cuts would be considered in the next 
meeting depending on the economic data and developm ents. 
15. Although recent data releases indicate that the  worst is likely to be over, 
concerns regarding the health of the global economy  remain. In particular, 
ongoing problems in credit and labor markets pose d ownside risks for global 
activity. Should the global conditions deteriorate again, and consequently 
delay the domestic recovery, Central Bank of Turkey  (CBT) would consider 
another cycle of rate cuts.  Lingering problems across the global economy are 
not resolved completely and there are still uncerta inties regarding the strength 
of the recovery. Taking these factors into account,  the Committee reiterated 
that it would be necessary for the monetary policy to maintain an easing bias 
for a long period of time. 
16. Another possible scenario, according to the Com mittee members, is a surge in 
capital inflows to emerging markets owing to the re lative improvement of credit 
risk across these countries. Ample liquidity driven  by the expansionary fiscal 
and monetary policies on a worldwide scale, coupled  with rising risk appetites, 
have led to large capital inflows to emerging marke ts. Current slack in the 
economy would imply that a fall in the cost of impo rted inputs could be rapidly 
transmitted to consumer prices, suggesting that a f urther acceleration in 
capital inflows may exacerbate downward risks on in flation. Realization of 
such a scenario could lead to temporarily lower pol icy rates. 
17. The CBT will continue to monitor fiscal policy developments closely while 
formulating monetary policy. Enhancing the framewor k set out in the Medium 
Term Program (MTP) through further structural adjus tments to strengthen 
fiscal discipline, would support the improvement of  Turkey’s sovereign risk. 
Should the goals set out in the MTP be implemented,  it would be possible to 
keep policy rates at single digits throughout the f orecast horizon. 
18. The course of oil and other commodity prices co nstitutes another important 
risk. Ample liquidity driven by countercyclical pol icies on a global scale creates 
speculative movements not only regarding emerging m arket currencies, but 
also for commodity prices. Therefore, oil and other  commodity price 
developments warrant caution, even under a scenario  of a gradual global 
economic recovery. Nonetheless, weak domestic deman d conditions would 
limit the pass-through stemming from upside cost-pu sh shocks. Therefore, the 
Committee will accommodate the short-term volatilit y in commodity prices, 
especially when the resource utilization remains at  depressed levels. 
However, if an uptrend in commodity prices reflects  a strong and durable 
rebound in global activity that would in turn creat e inflationary pressures, then monetary policy will react appropriately to keep in flation in line with medium-
term inflation targets. 
19. The fact that the crisis itself, and the policy  responses in reaction to it, are 
unprecedented in recent history, creates risks rega rding the inflation and 
monetary policy outlook. It is extremely difficult estimate with precision the 
impact of the recent monetary policy measures taken  at the global scale. 
Although not having resorted to explicit quantitati ve easing eliminates some of 
the risks for the Turkish case, it should still be noted that the full impact of the 
cumulative easing of 1000 basis points since Novemb er 2008 would be seen 
with a lag. In other words, although baseline scena rio does not envisage any 
policy rate hikes for an extended period, it is imp ortant to monitor the impact of 
the policies closely to ensure an appropriate timel y response to any 
development not envisaged in above assessments. 
20. The CBT has been taking the necessary measures to contain the adverse 
effects of the global financial turmoil on the dome stic economy. However, 
prudent monetary policy is necessary, but not suffi cient to maintain the 
resilience of the economy against the global crisis . Therefore, strengthening 
the commitment to fiscal discipline and the structu ral reform agenda is also 
critical for facilitating expectations management a nd thus for supporting the 
effectiveness of the monetary policy decisions. In this respect, timely 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term 
Program and European Union accession process remain s to be of utmost 
importance. 
 