No: 2009-04 
15 January 2009  
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: January 15, 2009 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has dec ided to lower the policy 
rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate is decreased from 15 percent to 13 
percent, while lending rate is decreased from 17.50 per cent to 15.50 percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing ra te between 4:00 p.m. – 
5:00 p.m. is decreased from 11 percent to 9 percent, whi le lending rate is 
decreased from 20.50 percent to 18.50 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity  borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions is decre ased from 16.50 
percent to 14.50 percent. 
Recent readings indicate that the slowdown in the domest ic economic activity 
has further intensified. Latest forecasts suggest that ongo ing problems in international 
credit markets and the global economy will last longer t han previously envisaged. 
Therefore, downward pressures on both domestic and extern al demand and inflation 
will continue. Moreover, significant drops in oil and ot her commodity prices are having a 
favorable impact on disinflation. The Committee predict s that inflation will be close to 
the target by mid-2009, and that the probability of  undershooting the target by the end of 
the year has increased. 
The Committee has judged that moving forward a sizeabl e portion of the rate 
cuts envisaged for the coming months would help offset the  tightening in financial 
conditions. The Central Bank will continue to take the n ecessary measures to contain 
the adverse effects of the global financial turmoil on t he domestic economy, provided 
that they do not conflict with the price stability obje ctive. Uncertainties regarding the 
impact of the problems in financial markets on the real economy remain at high levels. 
The extent and the timing of a possible future rate cut  will depend on the factors 
affecting inflation outlook. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
eight working days.  
 