No: 2009 – 37 
29 December 2009 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: December 17, 2009 
 
 
  Inflation Developments  
1. Consumer prices increased by 1.27 percent in Nov ember, driving annual 
inflation up by 0.45 percentage points to 5.53 perc ent year-on-year, largely 
due to rising unprocessed food prices. When unproce ssed food, energy and 
gold are excluded, November outturn represents one of the lowest monthly 
inflation rates recorded in recent years. In additi on, the behavior of 
subcategories does not point to a deterioration in the general pricing behavior. 
Overall, the November rise in annual inflation is m ainly attributable to 
transitory factors and base effects, and thus under lying trend inflation remains 
subdued. 
2. Food prices have been the major factor underlyin g the recent increase in 
inflation. In particular, unprocessed food prices h ave remained volatile over 
the year. After having registered the lowest third quarter rate of change in five 
years, unprocessed food prices ran above seasonal a verages during the last 
two months owing to higher fruit/vegetable and meat  prices, which is expected 
to continue into December. In contrast, the outlook  regarding processed food 
prices remains favorable.  
3. Having picked up due to hikes in electricity tar iffs during October, energy 
prices continued to rise in November in line with i nternational oil prices. The 
annual rate of increase in energy prices is expecte d to accelerate in coming 
months owing to base effects. The drop in commodity  prices during the final 
quarter of 2008 had driven energy prices down sharp ly starting from 
December 2008. Therefore, the resulting impact of t hese base effects on 
inflation is expected to be visible starting from D ecember 2009. 
4. Owing to the expiration of the temporary tax cut s, the annual rate of increase 
in the prices of goods excluding energy and food co ntinued to increase in 
November. Underpinning this development was the 7.6 1 percent rise in gold 
prices owing to soaring international prices as wel l as the increase in clothing 
and footwear inflation that was driven by the low b ase effects from a year ago. 
5. Annual services inflation continued along a down trend during November. 
Annual rental inflation declined further, while pri ces for transport and other services dropped modestly. Higher meat prices had a  more moderate impact 
on restaurants and hotels than in the previous two months. Thus, annual 
inflation in the overall services index decreased t o historically low levels.  
6. In sum, the Monetary Policy Committee (the Commi ttee) stated that the 
upcoming period would be marked by strong base effe cts, particularly leading 
to a sizeable increase in annual inflation in Decem ber. Yet, the Committee 
expects core inflation to remain at low levels.  
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
7. Third quarter national accounts releases were co nsistent with the outlook 
presented in the October Inflation Report. Gross Do mestic Product (GDP) 
continued to grow quarter-on-quarter, albeit slowly . In particular, the data 
confirmed that after a robust second quarter, priva te consumption moderated 
as tax cuts were phased out. Meanwhile, private inv estments have recovered 
slightly quarter-on-quarter for the first time in a  long while. Taken together, 
total final domestic demand has remained flat.  
8. Recent readings suggest that the economy is on t rack for moderate recovery. 
Industrial production increased by 6.5 percent year -on-year during October 
2009, which was the first year-on-year positive gro wth rate for a long period of 
time. However, the Committee attributed the product ion growth largely to 
working-day effects and noted that industrial produ ction continued to contract 
year-on-year after adjusting for calendar-related e ffects. The Committee 
expects calendar effects to remain prevalent during  November and December, 
and emphasizes that year-on-year comparisons should  be based on calendar-
adjusted data. 
9. The Committee indicated that industrial producti on grew markedly month-on-
month during October, even in seasonally adjusted t erms. Yet, production is 
likely to fluctuate beyond seasonal patterns during  the month of Ramadan and 
the ensuing religious holiday period, and therefore  assessments regarding 
production should not rely on a single month’s real ization. Accordingly, 
comparing the September-October period with the Jul y-August period suggest 
that industrial production is on a moderate recover y path in seasonally 
adjusted terms. Thus, it should be noted that it wo uld be inappropriate to 
conclude a strong and durable recovery in productio n, based solely on the 
October data.  
10. Leading indicators suggest that the pace of gro wth continued to slow in the 
fourth quarter. With the expiration of all tax ince ntives, the underlying trend for 
consumption demand has moderated. The unfavorable o utlook continues for 
spending categories more sensitive to current incom e. The Committee members noted that, given the precarious labor mark et conditions, the 
demand for categories sensitive to current income m ight continue to be weak. 
In seasonally adjusted terms, the production of con sumer goods remained 
virtually unchanged in October from a quarter ago, while imports, especially of 
passenger cars, contracted. Consumer confidence and  consumption indices 
confirm this weak outlook. Therefore, consumption d emand is expected to 
remain mostly flat during the final quarter.  
11. Among the factors restraining capacity utilizat ion across manufacturing 
industries, the share of insufficient domestic dema nd continued to increase, 
while the role attributed to weak foreign markets r emains high. In addition, 
aggregate demand uncertainty continues to suppress investment demand. 
Considering both production and import data, invest ment demand is expected 
to recover further during the fourth quarter, yet r emain at low levels. The 
Committee restated that the idle capacity resulting  from low resource 
utilization is likely to have a dampening effect on  investment demand for quite 
some time. 
12. Foreign demand remains weak. In this context, t he absence of a strong and 
sustained turnaround in industrial production conti nues to restrain services 
sectors with strong industrial linkages, such as tr ade and 
transport/communication as well as the outlook for economic activity and 
employment prospects more generally. In fact, close r inspection of the 
industrial composition reveals that trade-related s ervices sectors seem to have 
been particularly more affected by foreign demand c onditions. Therefore, 
without a marked improvement in foreign demand and/ or significant 
diversification in export markets, economic recover y is not likely. Hence, the 
Committee reiterated its expectation that aggregate  demand would recover 
gradually. 
13. Uncertainties regarding aggregate demand linger, an d employment conditions 
are expected to take a long time to fully recover. In fact, unemployment rose 
by 2.7 percentage points to 13.4 percent year-on-ye ar during September 
2009, while non-farm unemployment increased by 3.5 percentage points year-
on-year. The labor force participation rate continu es to have an adverse 
impact on the unemployment rate. After hitting a re cord high in May 2009, 
non-farm and overall unemployment rates have recent ly recovered in 
seasonally adjusted terms, albeit modestly. The end  of the decline in industrial 
employment was viewed by the Committee as an import ant development. 
However, given the slow pace of recovery in employm ent, the unemployment 
rate is likely to remain elevated for a long time.  
   Monetary Policy and Risks 
14. The collapse of global demand and commodity pri ces after the intensification 
of the global crisis during the last quarter of 200 8 had been followed by a 
sharp fall in inflation. Accordingly, annual inflat ion ―the year-on-year rate of 
change in the consumer price index ―is likely to display upward movements 
owing to base effects, although monthly rate of cha nges in prices are expected 
to hover at moderate levels. The Committee therefor e stated that strong base 
effects could lead to a significant increase in ann ual inflation in the forthcoming 
period, especially in December; yet core inflation would remain at low levels. 
Annual inflation could display upward movements thr ough mid-2010 by the 
same token, yet this possibility had already been r eflected in the monetary 
stance outlined in the October Inflation Report. 
15. The Committee indicated that the economic activ ity is on a moderate but 
stable upward trend. However, resource utilization,  hence inflation, is expected 
to stay around low levels in the medium term, given  the existing low levels of 
capital and labor utilization. Therefore, core infl ation indicators would display a 
modest pace, and hence annual inflation is expected  to revert back to a 
declining trend in the last quarter of 2010, ending  the year below the target. 
16. The policy rate cuts implemented since November  2008, and the 
improvements in global risk perceptions have starte d to exert favorable effects 
on credit markets. Committee members have also unde rscored the important 
role of the sound domestic banking system in suppor ting the recovery in credit 
markets. However, the ongoing tightness in lending standards regarding credit 
to small- and medium-sized enterprises as well as l onger-term loans is still a 
factor restraining economic activity. 
17. Although recent data releases indicate that the  worst is likely to be over, 
concerns regarding the strength of the global recov ery remain. Accordingly, 
taking into account that lingering problems across the global economy have 
yet to be resolved completely and there are still u ncertainties regarding the 
strength of the recovery, the Committee, in line wi th the policy stance 
presented in the Inflation Report, emphasized that it would be necessary to 
keep policy rates at low levels for a long period o f time. 
18. In particular, ongoing problems in credit and l abor markets pose downside 
risks for global activity. Should global conditions  deteriorate again, and 
consequently delay the domestic recovery, another c ycle of rate cuts would be 
considered. Committee members stated that although materialization of this 
scenario has become less likely, it should not be c ompletely disregarded. 
19. According to the Committee members, another pos sible scenario involves a 
surge in capital inflows to emerging markets owing to the relative improvement of credit risk across these countries. Ample liquid ity driven by the 
expansionary fiscal and monetary policies on a worl dwide scale, coupled with 
rising risk appetites, have led to large capital in flows to emerging markets. 
Given the current slack across the economy, a fall in the cost of imported 
inputs could be rapidly transmitted to consumer pri ces, suggesting that a 
further acceleration in capital inflows may exacerb ate downward risks on 
inflation. Realization of such a scenario could lea d to temporarily lower policy 
rates. 
20. The course of oil and other commodity prices co nstitutes another important 
risk factor. Ample liquidity driven by countercycli cal policies on a global scale 
has encouraged speculative investments not only int o emerging market 
currencies, but also into commodities. Therefore, o il and other commodity 
price developments warrant careful surveillance, ev en under a scenario of a 
gradual global economic recovery. Nonetheless, weak  domestic demand 
conditions would limit the pass-through stemming fr om upside cost-push 
shocks. Therefore, the Committee will not react to short-term commodity price 
volatility, especially when resource utilization re mains at depressed levels. 
However, if an uptrend in commodity prices reflects  a strong and durable 
rebound in global activity that would in turn creat e inflationary pressures, then 
monetary policy will react appropriately to keep in flation in line with the 
medium-term inflation targets. 
21. The Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) will continue to monitor fiscal policy 
developments closely while formulating monetary pol icy. Enhancing the 
framework set out in the Medium Term Program (MTP) through further 
structural adjustments to strengthen fiscal discipl ine, would support the 
improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk. Should the goals set out in the MTP 
be implemented, it would be possible to keep policy  rates at single digits 
throughout the medium term. 
22. The CBT has been taking the necessary measures to contain the adverse 
effects of the global financial turmoil on the dome stic economy. However, 
prudent monetary policy is necessary, but not suffi cient to maintain the 
resilience of the economy against the global crisis . Therefore, strengthening 
the commitment to fiscal discipline and the structu ral reform agenda is also 
critical for facilitating expectations management a nd thus for supporting the 
effectiveness of the monetary policy decisions. In this respect, timely 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term 
Program and European Union accession process remain s to be of utmost 
importance. 
 