No: 2009 - 19 
16 June 2009 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: June 16, 2009 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç, 
M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has deci ded to lower the policy 
rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate is decreased from 9.25 percent to 8.75 
percent, while lending rate is decreased from 11.75 per cent to 11.25 percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing ra te between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 
p.m. is decreased from 5.25 percent to 4.75 percent, whi le lending rate is decreased 
from 14.75 percent to 14.25 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity  borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions is decre ased from 10.75 percent 
to 10.25 percent. 
 
Recent data releases signal a partial recovery in domestic economic activity. 
However, resolving the problems in the global economy is likely to take a considerable 
period of time. External demand remains weak while dom estic investment demand 
continues to contract. These developments suggest that the r ecovery in economic activity 
would be slow and gradual, and labor market conditions are not expected to improve 
anytime soon. Therefore, inflation is expected to remai n at low levels in the foreseeable 
future. It should also be noted that inflation could r ise temporarily in June due to tax hikes 
and base effects. 
The tightness in financial conditions still persists to some extent, and uncertainties 
regarding the impact of the problems in financial marke ts on the real economy persist, 
suggesting that downside risks still remain. Therefore, th e Committee envisages that the 
next rate cut may be measured, and that it seems necessary for the monetary policy to 
maintain an easing bias for a considerable period. The Committee will consider a 
deceleration in the pace of rate cuts or a pause should t he signs of improvement in 
economic activity turn into a robust recovery.  
The Committee has also assessed current demand conditions an d projections of the 
Turkish lira liquidity. To facilitate the liquidity ma nagement of banks and to enhance the 
transmission of monetary policy, the Committee has appro ved the use of repos up to three-
month maturity, in addition to the main funding inst rument of one-week repos, when 
needed. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
eight working days.  
 