No: 2009 – 30 
      15 October 2009 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: October 15, 2009 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç, 
M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has d ecided to lower the policy 
rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate is decr eased from 7.25 percent to 
6.75 percent, while lending rate is decreased from 9.75 percent to 9.25 percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate between 4:00 p.m. – 
5:00 p.m. is decreased from 3.25 percent to 2.75 pe rcent, while lending rate is 
decreased from 12.75 percent to 12.25 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week matu rity borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions is decreased from 8.75 
percent to 8.25 percent. 
 
Recent data releases indicate that, in line with th e Committee’s previous 
assessments, the ongoing recovery in economic activ ity will be gradual and protracted. 
External demand and domestic investment demand rema in weak. Moreover, 
consumption demand, after having increased markedly  during the second quarter, is 
expected to display a weaker course in the third qu arter. Although employment 
indicators show some improvement, it remains to be seen whether this will turn into a 
robust recovery. Therefore, inflation is expected t o remain at low levels for a long period 
of time. 
Lingering problems across the global economy are no t resolved completely and 
there are still uncertainties regarding the strengt h of the recovery. Taking these factors 
into account, the Committee reiterates that it will  be necessary for the monetary policy 
to maintain an easing bias for a long period of tim e. The Committee notes that, the 
cumulative policy rate cuts implemented since Novem ber 2008, and the improvements 
in global risk perceptions have started to have fav orable effects on credit markets. The 
Committee indicates that a slowdown in the pace of the rate cuts would be considered 
in the next meeting depending on the economic data and developments. 
In addition, the Committee, after taking liquidity conditions into consideration, has 
made the assessment that a limited reduction in Tur kish Lira reserve requirements 
would alleviate the tightness in credit conditions,  and thus enhance the effectiveness of 
the expansionary monetary policy. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance . 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
eight working days.  