No: 2009 - 09 
                        03 March 2009 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: February 19, 2009 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices increased by 0.29 percent in Jan uary, and inflation dropped 
to 9.50 percent year-on-year. Exchange rate pass-th rough remained low 
owing to the marked slowdown in economic activity, while easing oil and other 
commodity prices continued to help bring inflation down. 
2. Unprocessed food prices continued to rise wherea s processed food inflation 
remained on the decline. Unprocessed food price inf lation is expected to ease 
in the short run due to favorable weather condition s and weak foreign demand. 
On the processed food prices front, annual inflatio n is expected to remain on a 
downward path in the first half of 2009. Accordingl y, food prices will continue 
to contribute to disinflation in the coming months.  
3. Annual energy price inflation dropped by a cumul ative 16 points to 15.02 
percent in the last three months on falling oil and  other commodity prices. 
Energy price inflation will continue to fall with t he reduction in natural gas rates 
in February, which will have around 0.3 percentage points downward 
contribution to inflation. 
4. Annual inflation in goods excluding energy and f ood increased by 1 point to 
4.74 percent in January. After displaying a sharp d rop in December due to 
early seasonal discounts, clothing prices decreased  at a less marked pace in 
January than in previous year, pushing the group’s annual inflation up in 
January. Meanwhile, the ongoing weakening in econom ic activity continued to 
mitigate the exchange rate pass-through on prices o f durable goods. 
Accordingly durable goods inflation increased only slightly to an annual rate of 
3.46 percent in January. 
5. Inflation in services declined to 9.89 percent i n January. The significant 
slowdown in annual services inflation suggests a do wnward course in the 
underlying inflation trend. Plunging world oil pric es have brought transport 
inflation down, while weaker domestic demand and lo wer food prices have had 
a favorable impact on catering prices. Rent inflati on eased further in January. 
Given the continued softening in domestic demand, a nnual inflation in services 
is expected to moderate further. 6. Overall, the Monetary Policy Committee (the Comm ittee) expects inflation to 
decelerate at a faster pace in the coming months, t hanks to the fall in 
underlying inflation and the favorable base effect.   
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
7. Recent readings suggest that economic activity c ontinues to weaken. 
Industrial production, which has been on the fall i n seasonally adjusted terms 
since July, displayed a sharp contraction in the fi nal quarter. Readings on 
capacity utilization and other key indicators point  to a further decline in 
industrial production in January. 
8. Readings on the labor market confirm the sharp w eakening of economic 
activity. In the fourth quarter of 2008, non-farm e mployment fell quarterly on a 
seasonally adjusted basis, and non-farm unemploymen t surged rapidly. The 
fall in non-farm employment can be attributed not o nly to the slowdown in 
overall economic activity but also to the sectoral shock driven by the sharp 
decline in exports. The number of people receiving unemployment benefits 
increased markedly in January, suggesting that the rise in unemployment 
accelerated in early 2009. In light of these assess ments, the Committee noted 
that non-farm unemployment might display a historic  high in the first quarter. 
9. Recent readings indicate that although consumer sentiment has shown signs 
of recovery, it has remained low by historical stan dards. Automobiles sales 
displayed a contraction in annual terms since June,  whereas they increased in 
December and January in seasonally adjusted terms. Consumption indices 
followed a similar pattern, showing a slight recove ry in January. The 
deterioration in consumer confidence stopped in Dec ember-January period, 
while housing and personal loans have displayed sig ns of recovery recently. 
However, the Committee noted that it would be too e arly to make a conclusive 
statement whether these indicators point to a long lasting recovery. 
10. Indicators for investment demand continued to d isplay a weak course. 
Production and imports of capital goods dropped dra matically in the final 
quarter of 2008, both in annual and quarterly terms . The Committee indicated 
that the recovery in investment spending would take  time, given the historically 
low capacity utilization rates. 
11. Industrial production indexes in advanced econo mies registered a sizable drop 
in December and foreign demand remained weak on slo wer global growth. 
Accordingly, the export quantity index continued to  fall in December, posting a 
steep quarterly drop in the fourth quarter of 2008.  Nominal export figures on 
January and February suggests that the weakening of  foreign demand 
continued into the first quarter.  
   Monetary Policy and Risks 
12. Problems in international credit markets and th e global economy persist, while 
new information lead to further downward revisions in the forecasts for global 
economic outlook. Uncertainties regarding the impac t of the problems in 
financial markets on the real economy remain high. In this context, domestic 
and foreign demand are  expected to stay weak in th e near term, and thus it 
will take some time for the economic activity to re cover. Therefore, downward 
pressures on inflation are expected to prevail. 
13. The Committee indicated that the recovery in cr edit would be slow, reflecting 
tight financial conditions both in domestic and ext ernal terms. Besides, 
disposal income growth is expected to remain subdue d, given the moderating 
employment growth and weakening labor market condit ions. Therefore, the 
recovery in domestic demand is expected to be gradu al and slow, which is 
also supported by the recent readings on domestic e conomic activity.  
14. The fall in oil and other commodity prices are having a favorable impact on 
inflation, and thus contributing to the decline in inflation expectations. 
Recently, survey based medium term inflation expect ations have been lower 
than the inflation targets. The Committee expects a  rapid deceleration in 
inflation in the short term with more significant c ontribution of easing energy 
and food inflation. This should also bring down inf lation expectations further.  
15. Looking ahead, it is anticipated that developme nts in both the aggregate 
demand conditions and the real marginal costs will drive down inflation 
significantly in the forthcoming period, bringing i nflation to the target levels 
sooner than envisaged. Judging that inflation is li kely to undershoot the target 
significantly at the end of the year, the Committee  decided to lower short-term 
interest rates by 150 basis points. In line with th e baseline scenario at the 
January Inflation Report, the Committee stated that  the amount of the next 
rate cut would likely be less than the current one and reiterated that the extent 
and the timing of a possible future rate cut would depend on the factors 
affecting the inflation outlook. 
16. Business loan rates have responded less to the policy rate cuts compared to 
the consumer loan rates. Accordingly, the spread be tween business loan rates 
and the policy rates have remained at significantly  high levels. In this respect, 
the Committee indicated that the tightness in finan cial conditions still persist to 
some degree, notwithstanding the recent policy rate  cuts. Credit supply 
remains tight and a significant part of the credit demand by firms can be 
attributed to debt restructuring. Therefore, the ro le of the credit channel in 
facilitating economic activity remains limited. Dev elopments in credit markets 
are closely monitored as a coincident indicator for  economic activity and also 
in terms of their importance for the transmission o f monetary policy.  17. It is worth to mention that a critical assumpti on underlying the inflation and 
monetary policy outlook outlined above is that gove rnment fiscal stance will 
remain neutral in cyclically adjusted terms. In oth er words, the baseline 
scenario envisages that government expenditures wil l evolve in line with the 
official projections, while tax revenues will moder ate as implied by the cyclical 
downturn. Any significant deviation from this frame work may lead to a revision 
in the outlook for inflation and monetary policy. 
18. The Central Bank will continue to take the nece ssary measures to contain the 
adverse effects of the global financial turmoil on the domestic economy, 
provided that they do not conflict with the price s tability objective. In this 
context, the Committee underscored the importance o f maintaining the smooth 
functioning of the financial system and the efficie nt operation of credit markets, 
and reached a consensus on implementing additional measures regarding the 
foreign exchange liquidity. 
19. Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not su fficient to maintain the 
resilience of the economy against the global crisis , especially under current 
conditions. The Committee noted that the rise in th e public sector borrowing 
requirement throughout the year 2009 could undermin e the effectiveness of 
monetary policy by weakening the impact of policy d ecisions over the longer 
end of the yield curve. Strengthening the commitmen t to fiscal discipline and 
structural reform agenda is critical for facilitati ng expectations management 
and also for enhancing the simulative impact of the  monetary accommodation. 
In this respect, commitment to the European Union a ccession process, and 
timely implementation and revision of the structura l reforms envisaged in the 
Medium Term Program remain to be of utmost importan ce. 