No: 2009-28 
17 September 2009 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: September 17, 2009 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç, 
M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has deci ded to lower the policy 
rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate is decreased from 7.75 percent to 
7.25 percent, while lending rate is decreased from 10.2 5 percent to 9.75 percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing ra te between 4:00 p.m. – 
5:00 p.m. is decreased from 3.75 percent to 3.25 percent , while lending rate is 
decreased from 13.25 percent to 12.75 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturity  borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions is decre ased from 9.25 
percent to 8.75 percent. 
 
Recent data releases indicate that, in line with the Co mmittee’s previous 
assessments, the ongoing recovery in economic activity will be  gradual and protracted, 
External demand and domestic investment demand remain we ak, while labor market 
conditions do not display a significant improvement. More over, consumption demand, 
after having increased markedly during the second quarter , is expected to display a 
weaker course in the third quarter. Therefore, in line  with the perspective outlined in the 
Inflation Report, inflation is expected to remain at l ow levels for a long period of time. 
The Committee expects that the cumulative policy rate cuts implemented since 
November 2008, provided that the improvements in global  risk perceptions persist, 
would start to have some effect on credit markets in the f orthcoming period. However, 
the weakness in labor markets is ongoing and lingering pr oblems across the global 
economy are not resolved completely, suggesting that ther e are still uncertainties 
regarding the strength of the recovery. Therefore, the  Committee reiterates that it will be 
necessary for the monetary policy to maintain an easing bias for a long period of time. 
The size and the duration of the rate cuts will depend  on the pace of the recovery in 
economic activity. Moreover, further improvements in the r isk premium may lead to a 
longer rate cut cycle. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
eight working days.  
 