No: 2009 – 34 
19 November 2009  
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: November 19, 2009 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç, 
M. Đbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has d ecided to lower the policy 
rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate is decr eased from 6.75 percent to 
6.50 percent, while lending rate is decreased from 9.25 percent to 9 percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing rate between 4:00 p.m. – 
5:00 p.m. is decreased from 2.75 percent to 2.50 pe rcent, while lending rate is 
decreased from 12.25 percent to 12 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week matu rity borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions is decreased from 8.25 
percent to 8 percent. 
 
Recent data releases indicate that, in line with th e Committee’s previous 
assessments, the ongoing recovery in economic activ ity will be gradual and protracted. 
External demand and domestic investment demand rema in weak. Moreover, 
consumption demand has displayed a weaker course, a fter having increased markedly 
during the second quarter. Indicators on labor mark et suggest that it will take a long 
time for the employment conditions to fully recover . Although headline annual inflation 
could display some upward movements through mid-201 0 due to strong base effects, 
resource utilization, and hence inflation, is expec ted to hover around low levels. 
Accordingly, the Committee has indicated that the m onetary policy stance outlined in 
the Inflation Report would be maintained. 
The Committee notes that the cumulative policy rate  cuts implemented since 
November 2008 and the improvements in global risk p erceptions have started to exert 
favorable effects on credit markets. However, linge ring problems across the global 
economy are not resolved completely and there are s till uncertainties regarding the 
strength of the recovery. Taking these factors into  account, the Committee has 
reiterated that it would be necessary for the monet ary policy to maintain an easing bias 
for a long period of time. The Committee has also i ndicated that future rate decisions 
would be conditional on economic data and developme nts. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance . 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
eight working days.  