No: 2009-16 
29 April 2009 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: April 16, 2009 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices increased by 1.1 percent in March, pushi ng inflation up to 
7.89 percent year-on-year, largely due to the sharp r ise in unprocessed food 
prices, as stated in the press releases from the Monetary P olicy Committee 
(MPC) last month.  
2. Unprocessed food prices were up 8.58 percent in March, and annual inflation 
in this category climbed to 10.20 percent. After rising at a more moderate pace 
in the first two months of 2009 as compared to previous years, fresh fruit and 
vegetable prices soared by a remarkable 16.99 percent in  March, far beyond 
seasonal patterns, owing to unfavorable weather conditi ons and the relative 
increase in foreign demand for these products. Meanwhile , the annual rate of 
increase in processed food prices continued to fall in March  because of the 
decline in bread and grain prices driven by lower whea t prices, and annual 
processed food inflation dropped by 3.2 percentage poin ts to 8.30 percent. In 
sum, with the steep increase in unprocessed food prices, ann ual food and 
nonalcoholic beverages inflation surged to 9.18 percent in March from 6.16 
percent in February, despite falling processed food price s. 
3. Energy prices were nearly unchanged in March, and an nual inflation in this 
category eased to 12.59 percent. The marked slowdown in solid fuel prices 
during the past two months continued into March, while fuel prices increased 
due to rising exchange rates and crude oil prices. Howeve r, despite the recent 
uptick, current crude oil prices are still well below thei r year-ago levels, 
suggesting that the annual rate of increase in energy p rices will continue to 
slow down in the short run.  
4. Prices of goods excluding energy and food remained f lat in March. Although 
prices of tobacco products increased by 7.34 percent, annual  inflation in this 
category dropped by about 1 percentage point to 4.23 percent on the back of 
the cuts in the Special Consumption Taxes (SCT) in durab le goods and the 
softening in annual clothing inflation. In the durabl e goods subcategory 
(excluding gold), prices dropped by 3.95 percent, while  annual inflation 
slumped to –0.95 percent. With the SCT tax cut, prices o f automobiles and 
white goods fell by 6.37 and 6.85 percent, respectively . Moreover, the three-
month Value Added Tax (VAT) cut on furniture and IT products announced in April will put some additional temporary downward pr essure on durable goods 
inflation. However, the Committee noted that exchang e rate movements might 
have a lagged impact on prices of durable goods followi ng the depletion of 
inventories. 
5. The slowdown in services prices that started in the fin al quarter of 2008 
continued into March, and annual services inflation fell  by around 1 
percentage point to 8.29 percent. With the lagged imp act of the sharp 
contraction in domestic demand, the rate of increase in se rvices prices eased 
across all subcategories. In particular, annual rent infla tion continued to fall at 
a more solid pace. 
6. The decline in the core inflation measures since the f ourth quarter of 2008 
continued into March, which resulted from the downtrend  in underlying inflation 
and, partly, from the SCT tax cuts in March. Yet, even  without the contribution 
of tax cuts, underlying inflation is still falling. Apa rt from the SCT tax cut, the 
VAT cut, effective in April, will also put some downwar d pressure on core 
inflation. However, it should be emphasized again tha t this impact will most 
likely disappear by the time these tax cuts expire, which  are therefore 
expected to cause fluctuations in the core inflation measu res over the short 
run. 
7. Overall, the downtrend in inflation became more p ronounced in the first 
quarter of 2009 on the back of the sharp contraction in economic activity. 
Furthermore, owing to the cumulative decline in oil a nd other commodity 
prices, inflation is expected to decelerate at a more ra pid pace in the short run. 
 
 Factors Affecting Inflation 
8. Recent readings suggest that economic activity continued  to weaken in the 
first quarter of 2009. In this period, domestic demand fell rapidly, while foreign 
demand remained subdued. Accordingly, industrial product ion shrunk by 22.5 
percent year-on-year during the January-February peri od. Moreover, the 
contraction, in seasonally adjusted terms, was deeper than  the previous 
quarter.  
9. Recent data releases indicate that tax cuts on selected goods, which are part 
of the fiscal package, helped to stimulate domestic sales. D omestic 
automobile sales rose by a record 82 percent month-on-mo nth in seasonally 
adjusted terms and recorded the first yearly increase since  May 2008. 
Similarly, domestic demand indicators such as imports of con sumer goods and 
domestic sales of household appliances were significantly hi gher in March. 
The Committee indicated that the partial rebound in consumer demand does 
not point to a long-lasting recovery, and is rather a result of the price incentives created by the fiscal package that brought consum er demand for 
selected goods forward.  
10. Foreign demand remains weak as of the first quarter . Because of slowing 
economic activity and falling energy prices, imports drop ped at a more rapid 
pace than exports and the foreign trade deficit kept na rrowing dramatically 
since the third quarter of 2008. Thus, the Committee m embers noted that 
there is an increasingly lower external financing need given the positive 
current account balance. 
11. The Committee pointed to the negative implicatio ns of the economic 
contraction for the labor market. The slowdown in non-f arm employment 
growth has intensified during the December 2008 and Fe bruary 2009 period. 
Accordingly, non-farm unemployment increased by 5.3 per centage points from 
a year earlier to 19 percent in this period, and tota l unemployment rose by 3.9 
percentage points to 15.5 percent. Increasing labor force  participation partly 
contributed to the surge in unemployment rates. On bal ance, the rise in 
unemployment rates is expected to put further downward  pressure on 
disposable income and unit labor costs for quite some time . 
12. In view of recent readings, the Committee indicate d that the rate of growth 
might register a double-digit decline in the first qua rter of 2009. Yet, 
confidence indices and coincident indicators of demand expe ctations suggest 
that the economy may start to recover slightly by the se cond quarter of the 
year.  
Monetary Policy and Risks 
13. The Committee reviewed the forecasts and the under lying assumptions to be 
published in the Inflation Report on April 30th. Com mittee members indicated 
that international credit markets continued to be under  strain and that there 
were no clear signs of a durable improvement in the gl obal economic outlook. 
In the January Inflation Report, it was assumed that th e recovery in the global 
economy would start at the beginning of 2010. However , data releases since 
then have indicated a sharper contraction in 2009, and a more gradual 
recovery throughout 2010. Therefore, compared to the previous report, the 
revised forecasts are based on a deeper downturn in 2009 , and a more 
gradual recovery in the global economy. 
14. In light of these assessments, the Committee concluded that the probability 
attached to the early recovery scenario in the January I nflation Report has 
diminished considerably. It was therefore agreed that, besides revising the 
baseline scenario, it would be appropriate to present a n alternative scenario 
that envisages a more gradual recovery than in the base line. 15. During the last quarter of 2008, the collapse of p roduction has been 
disproportionately severe for export-oriented firms, a nd—along with increasing 
labor force participation rates—has brought about a surge  in the 
unemployment rate. Moreover, recent indicators suggest t hat employment 
losses have continued during the first quarter of 2009. Therefore, labor market 
conditions are expected to contain unit labor costs and cur b domestic demand 
in the period ahead. 
16. Lower policy rates and expansionary fiscal policy hav e started to provide some 
stimulus to domestic demand. However, the Committee ant icipates that it will 
take some time for the global economy to stabilize and thus the recovery in 
aggregate domestic activity is expected to be gradual. A ccordingly, Committee 
members stated that aggregate demand conditions should su pport disinflation 
more forcefully, and for a longer period of time tha n envisaged in the previous 
Report. 
17. In light of these assessments and the partial improve ment in some risk 
indicators, the Committee has decided to cut policy rates by 75 basis points. 
The Committee has indicated that the rate cuts have low ered the probability of 
significantly undershooting the end-year inflation tar get. Therefore, it was 
stated that the next rate cut would likely be measured.  However, financial 
strains persist, and there is still a significant amount of  uncertainty regarding 
the feedback between the financial and real sectors, sugge sting that downside 
risks still remain. In this respect, the Committee envisage s that it may be 
necessary for the monetary policy to maintain an easing bias for a 
considerable period. 
18. The stance of fiscal policy is another major factor th at may affect the outlook 
for inflation and monetary policy.  Recently, budget revenues have been 
declining in line with the slowdown in economic activity , while expenditures 
have been accelerating due to countercyclical fiscal policy,  leading to a 
significant rise in the budget deficit. Possible adjustmen ts in excise taxes 
and/or administered prices in order to stabilize the bu dget could result some 
inflation volatility over the short term. Moreover, the increasing financing 
requirement of the government might weaken the favor able impact of 
monetary policy decisions on economic activity. The Commit tee members 
hence reiterated that, in order to reap the gains fro m short-term expansionary 
fiscal policy, it was important to commit to a credible m edium-term fiscal 
framework that would ensure fiscal discipline and debt sust ainability. 
19. Central Bank of Turkey will continue to take the ne cessary measures to 
contain the adverse effects of the global financial turm oil on the domestic 
economy, provided that they do not conflict with the p rice stability objective. 
Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not sufficient to  maintain the resilience of the economy against the global crisis. There fore, strengthening 
the commitment to fiscal discipline and the structural ref orm agenda is also 
critical for facilitating expectations management and fo r supporting the 
effectiveness of the monetary policy decisions. In this resp ect, commitment to 
the European Union accession process, and timely implement ation of the 
structural reforms envisaged in the Pre-Accession Economic Pr ogram remain 
to be of utmost importance. 
 
 