No: 2009-07                               
19 February 2009 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: February 19, 2009 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah 
Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has deci ded to lower the policy rates 
as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate is decreased  from 13 percent to 11.50 
percent, while lending rate is decreased from 15.50 per cent to 14 percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates: Borrowing ra te between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m. 
is decreased from 9 percent to 7.5 percent, while lendin g rate is decreased from 18.50 
percent to 17 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturit y borrowing facilities provided for 
primary dealers via repo transactions is decreased from 14 .50 percent to 13 percent. 
 
Recent readings indicate that the domestic economic activit y continues to slow down. 
Problems in international credit markets and the global  economy persist, suggesting that it will 
take some time for the economic activity to recover. Ther efore, downward pressures on 
inflation are expected to prevail. Moreover, ongoing  declines in oil and other commodity prices 
are having a favorable impact on disinflation. Looking  ahead, the Committee predicts that the 
fall in inflation will be more significant in the for thcoming period and will reach the target levels 
sooner than envisaged. Judging that inflation is likely to significantly undershoot the target at 
the end of the year, the Committee has decided to low er short-term interest rates by 150 basis 
points. 
The Committee has indicated that the tightness in finan cial conditions still persist to 
some degree despite the recent policy rate cuts. The Cent ral Bank will continue to take the 
necessary measures to contain the adverse effects of the glo bal financial turmoil on the 
domestic economy, provided that they do not conflict wit h the price stability objective. 
Uncertainties regarding the impact of the problems in f inancial markets on the real economy 
remain high. The extent and the timing of a possible future rate cut will depend on the factors 
affecting the inflation outlook. 
Moreover, the Committee has underscored the importance of maintaining the smooth 
functioning of the financial system and the efficient op eration of credit markets, and has 
reached a consensus on implementing additional measures re garding the foreign exchange 
liquidity. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the inflation outlook 
may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within eight 
working days.  