No: 2009 – 18 
27 May 2009 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: May 14, 2009 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices increased by 0.02 percent in April, wh ile inflation fell to 6.13 
percent year-on-year. Annual inflation was down month -on-month across all 
major categories, suggesting a more broad-based decelerat ion in inflation 
owing to the significant slowdown in economic activity. 
2. Unprocessed food prices were down 0.95 percent in Apri l because of declining 
fruit and vegetable prices. Yet, annual inflation in this category rose month-on-
month, albeit modestly, to 10.87 percent in April. Fo reign demand for fruits and 
vegetables has been relatively increasing since the final  quarter of 2008. In 
fact, the quantity of exported fruits and vegetables g rew by an average of 25.2 
percent in the first quarter as compared to a year earl ier, which partially offset 
the downward pressure on their prices owing to increased production. On the 
other hand, annual processed food inflation decreased fu rther to 4.99 percent. 
As a result, annual food and nonalcoholic beverages infl ation dropped to 7.70 
percent. 
3. Energy prices decreased by 1.42 percent in April amid  reduced electricity 
tariffs and falling bottled gas, solid fuel and fuel p rices. Accordingly, the rate of 
increase in energy prices fell to 9.31 percent year-on-y ear. The reduction in 
gas tariffs should help further slow the rate of increase  in energy prices and 
thereby is expected to push consumer inflation down by 0 .3 percentage points 
in May. Given the current level of oil prices, the yea rly rate of increase in 
energy prices could continue to slide in coming months. 
4. Annual inflation in prices of goods excluding energy an d food dropped by 2.17 
percentage points in April to 2.06 percent, largely du e to prices of durable 
goods (excluding gold) which fell by 4.43 percent on th e back of Special 
Consumption Tax (SCT) and Value-Added Tax (VAT) cuts. The effects of the 
tax cuts were most pronounced during March and April. Acr oss the sub-
categories, the prices of furniture, automobiles and whi te goods fell by 7.63, 5 
and 2.74 percent, respectively. Accordingly, inflation i n durable goods plunged 
to –5.96 percent year-on-year. However, it must be em phasized again that 
these tax cuts would only have a short-lived favorable effect on inflation as 
they are due to expire in the following months.  5. Services prices continue to fall amid the sharp contract ion in domestic demand 
and also because of the lagged effects of weakening cost pr essures. The 
yearly rate of increase in services prices slumped to a hist oric low of 7.61 
percent in April. The decline was evident across all subcat egories of services. 
Annual services inflation is expected to edge further do wn in coming months.  
6. Core inflation measures continue to trend downward,  largely owing to the tax 
cuts that have been in place over the past two months. P ut differently, the 
recent sharp declines in the core inflation measures have been primarily 
driven by the tax cuts, and therefore the rapid slowdo wn in these measures is 
expected to be temporary. However, even without the contribution of these tax 
cuts, core inflation measures still declined, supporting th e view that inflation is 
still continuing on a downward path.  
7. Overall, the Monetary Policy Committee (the Commi ttee) expects inflation to 
decelerate further in the short run due to the softeni ng in economic activity and 
the past declines in oil and other commodity prices. 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
8. The latest data for the first quarter of 2009 confi rmed the continuing sharp 
contraction in economic activity. Industrial production shr unk by 22 percent 
year-on-year in this period and declined at a faster p ace than in the fourth 
quarter of 2008 in seasonally adjusted terms.  
9. Similarly, domestic investment demand contracted dram atically during the first 
quarter of the year. In seasonally adjusted terms, prod uction and imports of 
investment goods and sales of heavy commercial vehicles fel l sharply quarter-
on-quarter. In view of the low levels of resource util ization, and against the 
backdrop of the ongoing uncertainty regarding the glob al economy, the 
Committee expects investment demand to remain weak for quite some time.  
10. Recent data releases indicate that there may be some  rebound in private 
consumer demand. The tax cuts that have been implemente d as part of the 
fiscal package to help stimulate the economy have accelerat ed the depletion 
of inventories since March. In April, the tax cuts had a partial effect on the 
production of transport vehicles and machinery and equip ment, which account 
for a significant share of the manufacturing industry. I n fact, domestic sales of 
automobiles were much stronger in April than their fir st-quarter average in 
seasonally adjusted terms. Moreover, consumer confidence in dices have also 
gained some ground. Yet, the Committee members noted that some of the 
rebound in domestic demand could be attributed to the price incentives 
created by the fiscal package that brought consumer demand  for selected goods forward, and therefore, the pace and scale of the  recovery in domestic 
demand remains to be seen. 
11. The private sector’s capacity utilization rate rose m onth-on-month in April for 
the first time in a long time in seasonally adjusted te rms, suggesting that the 
rise in domestic sales have started to support production. In addition, the 
recent rebound in the business confidence index signals the  possibility of a 
partial recovery of economic activity going forward. 
12. Although there have been signs of a partial recove ry in economic activity, 
there is no sign of improvement in labor market conditi ons. Applications for 
unemployment benefits remain high, indicating that un employment continues 
to increase. On balance, the decline in non-farm employ ment and the high 
level of the unemployment rate are both expected to put further downward 
pressure on domestic demand and unit labor costs in the up coming period.  
13. Foreign demand remains weak. Exports continued to f all during the first 
quarter of 2009 due to global recession. Furthermore, coincident indicators for 
April and May exports do not point to a durable recov ery in foreign demand. 
Although the Business Tendency Survey has shown a partial  recovery 
regarding expectations for foreign demand more recentl y, foreign demand 
conditions are not expected to improve significantly wit hout a lasting 
improvement in the global economic outlook.  
Monetary Policy and Risks  
14. In light of these assessments, economic activity and emp loyment are not 
expected to recover anytime soon, suggesting that downwa rd pressures on 
inflation are expected to last going forward. According ly, the Committee 
indicated that these recent developments are consistent wi th the outlook 
presented in the April Inflation Report and has thus d ecided to cut policy rates 
by 50 basis points. 
15. The Committee believes that the rate cuts have low ered the probability of 
significantly undershooting the medium-term inflation targets. Recently, 
improvement in global risk perceptions and expectations r egarding the future 
course of policy rates have also contributed to the declin e in longer-term 
interest rates to historically low levels. In this context , it should be highlighted 
that changes in monetary conditions affect economic activit y and inflation with 
a lag. Therefore, given the cumulative easing in mone tary policy since 
November 2008, the Committee envisages that the next rate cut may be 
measured. 
16. However, the tightness in financial conditions still persist to some extent, and 
uncertainties regarding the impact of the problems across financial markets on the real economy are ongoing, suggesting that downside risks still remain. 
Although recent indicators regarding the global economi c outlook suggests 
that the worst may be over, it will nonetheless take som e time before the 
global financial system recovers, and therefore a full r ecovery in economic 
activity is not likely to be observed anytime soon. Accord ingly, it seems 
necessary for monetary policy to maintain an easing bias for a considerable 
period of time. 
17. Another major factor affecting inflation and mone tary policy outlook is the 
stance of fiscal policy. Budget revenues continue to declin e in line with the 
slowdown in economic activity, while expenditures rise ow ing to 
countercyclical fiscal policy, leading to a widening in th e budget deficit. The 
increasing financing requirement of the government mig ht weaken the 
favorable impact of monetary policy decisions on economic activity. The 
Committee members hence reiterated that, in order to reap the gains from 
short-term expansionary fiscal policy, it was important t o commit to a credible 
medium-term fiscal framework that would underpin fiscal discipline and debt 
sustainability. 
18. Central Bank of Turkey will continue to take the ne cessary measures to 
contain the adverse effects of the global financial turm oil on the domestic 
economy, provided that they do not conflict with the p rice stability objective. 
Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not sufficient to  maintain the 
resilience of the economy against the global crisis. There fore, strengthening 
the commitment to fiscal discipline and the structural ref orm agenda is also 
critical for facilitating expectations management and fo r supporting the 
effectiveness of the monetary policy decisions. In this resp ect, commitment to 
the European Union accession process, and timely implement ation of the 
structural reforms envisaged in the Pre-Accession Economic Pr ogram remain 
to be of utmost importance. 
 