No: 2010 – 42  
28 December 2010  
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: December 16, 2010  
 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. In November, consumer prices were up 0.03 percen t, while annual inflation 
was down 1.33 percentage points to 7.29 percent lar gely owing to the 
downward correction in unprocessed food prices, as stated in the summary of 
the November Monetary Policy Committee (the Committ ee) Meeting. 
Meanwhile, prices of core goods and services remain ed favorable.  
2. Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic bevera ges decreased by 4.7 
percentage points to 12.39 percent in November. Thu s, the contribution of 
food prices to annual inflation slowed to 3.41 perc entage points. After soaring 
dramatically over the past three months, unprocesse d food prices slumped in 
November amid falling vegetable prices. Leading ind icators suggest that this 
downtrend would continue into December. 
3. Processed food prices continued to rise in Novem ber. Processed meat prices 
rose further due to the lagged effects of previous increases in unprocessed 
meat prices. Prices of bread and cereals remained o n an upward trend amid 
rising wheat prices. Prices of other processed food  items, especially solid and 
liquid fats, were also on the rise in November. 
4. Fuel prices continue to rise amid higher interna tional oil prices. Yet, the annual 
rate of increase in energy prices continued to fall  in November on the back of 
base effects. Prices of alcoholic beverages increas ed by 16.2 percent due to 
the special consumption tax hike, but this increase  made only a limited 
contribution to consumer inflation. 
5. Core goods and services inflation remained muted , as expected. Annual 
services inflation increased slightly due to higher  prices of transport services, 
while the annual rate of increase in services other  than catering and transport 
continued to hover around all-time lows. Annual inf lation in core goods (goods 
excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacc o and gold) slowed further 
to 1.04 percent. Accordingly, despite a slight incr ease, core inflation indicators 
remained on track with medium-term targets. 6. With the additional support of falling unprocess ed food prices, the Committee 
expects inflation to decline in the forthcoming per iod. Meanwhile, core inflation 
indicators are expected to increase slightly, but r emain below medium-term 
targets. 
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
7. Recent releases regarding economic activity have  been consistent with the 
outlook presented in the October Inflation Report. Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) grew by 5.5 percent year-on-year in the third  quarter. The pace of 
economic recovery slowed in the third quarter due t o the lagged effects of the 
distress in European economies ongoing since May, a nd consequently, GDP 
increased by 1.1 percent quarter-on-quarter. This s lowdown was largely driven 
by the negative contribution of exports of goods an d services to quarterly GDP 
growth, while domestic demand continued to grow rap idly. 
8. Economic activity continues to recover amid stro ng domestic demand. 
Industrial production grew by a dramatic 3.1 percen t month-on-month in 
October in seasonally adjusted terms and remained s ignificantly above the 
average of the previous quarter. November's capacit y utilization rate and 
expectations for new orders suggest that production  has recovered at a faster 
pace than in the third quarter. This outlook is rec ently supported by both the 
sharp increases in domestic sales of automobiles an d commercial vehicles 
and the improvement in investment and consumer conf idence indices. These 
developments confirm the Committee's expectation of  a renewed acceleration 
in economic activity for the final quarter of 2010.  
9. Foreign demand remains weak. Although exports of  goods were higher than 
the third-quarter average during October and Novemb er, indicators for new 
orders show no sign of a strong recovery in the sho rt term. Weak foreign 
demand continues to suppress particularly industria l production. Therefore, the 
Committee expects that it would take a long time be fore industrial capacity 
utilization rates return to their pre-crisis levels . 
10. Employment conditions continue to improve, yet unemployment rates remain 
at high levels. Committee members have noted that l abor market 
developments are in line with the temporary slowdow n in production during the 
third quarter, and expect that employment growth wo uld resume by the end of 
the year amid the ongoing economic recovery. In fac t, after the third-quarter 
drop, non-farm employment was back on the rise in S eptember, albeit 
modestly. Nevertheless, the Committee has reiterate d that unemployment 
rates would remain higher than pre-crisis levels fo r some time, containing unit 
labor costs.  
  Monetary Policy and Risks  
11. The primary objective of the Central Bank of Tu rkey (CBT) is to achieve and 
maintain price stability. At the same time, financi al stability is one of the 
fundamental duties of the CBT. However, unlike othe r regulatory and 
supervisory institutions, the CBT approaches financ ial stability from a 
macroeconomic perspective. 
12. From a macro perspective, financial stability r isks under the current conditions 
are most evident as the rapidly increasing current account deficit fueled by 
short-term capital inflows. The divergence between domestic and foreign 
demand growth coupled with a rapid credit expansion  is increasing the current 
account deficit, thereby raising financial stabilit y concerns. Moreover, the 
recent developments and related policy decisions in  the European and US 
economies have been exacerbating these risks, neces sitating a revision in the 
domestic policy mix. 
13. The contribution of credit expansion to the cur rent account deficit deserves 
particular attention in an environment of weak exte rnal demand. Therefore, the 
Committee members have underscored that one of the goals of the current 
policy mix should be reducing the pace of credit gr owth. To this end, it was 
stated that reserve requirement ratios should be us ed as an active monetary 
policy tool. At the same time, the rapid pace of cr edit expansion also brings 
attention to the maturity mismatches between the as sets and liabilities of the 
banking system. Accordingly, gearing the policy mix  towards extending the 
maturities of the banking system liabilities would also help with regard to 
macroprudential risks. In this respect, the Committ ee has suggested that it 
would be useful to differentiate reserve requiremen t ratios for different TL 
deposit maturities in order to encourage longer-ter m funding, to raise reserve 
requirement ratios especially for short-term liabil ities, and to widen the scope 
of reserve requirements.  
14. Another issue which should be taken account whi le formulating current policy 
mix is fostering the maturity extension of capital inflows. This is important for 
improving the quality of the capital account and av oiding exchange rate 
movements detached from economic fundamentals. Agai nst this backdrop, the 
Committee has come to the conclusion that it would be an appropriate policy 
mix to lower the policy rate and to widen the corri dor between overnight 
borrowing and lending rates so as to allow fluctuat ions in the short-term 
interest rates, when needed. 
15. The Committee underscored that price stability should be the overriding 
concern while designing the policy measures against  the current account deficit. Although inflation is expected to be close  to the end-2010 target, the 
Committee members have highlighted that the sharp i ncreases in agricultural 
commodity prices such as cotton and wheat pose risk s for the inflation outlook. 
The existing output gap has been limiting the pass- through from agricultural 
commodity prices to the prices of core goods and se rvices. However, the 
Committee, highlighting the rapid pace of domestic demand, has stated that 
the impact of commodity prices on general price set ting behavior should be 
closely monitored. Accordingly, the Committee membe rs have agreed that the 
net impact of the macroprudential policy package im plemented—and to be 
implemented—both by the CBT and other institutions should be on the 
tightening side.       
16. In light of these assessments, as an outcome of  the meeting, the Committee 
has stated that a lower policy rate, a wider intere st rate corridor, combined 
with higher required reserve ratios would serve as a more effective policy mix, 
both for price stability and financial stability. 
17. The Committee assessed that the net impact of t hese measures on the 
monetary conditions would not be expansionary. In p articular, higher effective 
required reserve ratios are anticipated to curb the  credit growth through the 
cost and liquidity channels starting from January 2 011. The effects of today’s 
decisions on both price and financial stability wil l be monitored closely and 
additional measures will be implemented if necessar y. The composition and 
the direction of the policy instruments in the fort hcoming period may vary 
depending on the factors affecting price stability and financial stability. 
18. The policies implemented by the CBT should be a ssessed as an entire 
package. The monetary policy stance is not only det ermined by the level of the 
policy rates, but as a mixture of all the policy in struments mentioned above. 
Therefore, the net impact of the combination of the  policy measures should be 
taken into account while assessing the inflation ou tlook. 
19. The measures implemented by the CBT are necessa ry but not alone sufficient 
to safeguard financial stability under current cond itions. Coordination across 
all institutions responsible for regulation, superv ision and counterbalancing is 
therefore crucial. The support of other institution s especially regarding the 
tightening of credit supply and encouraging maturit y extensions would 
increase the flexibility and effectiveness of monet ary policy.  
20. Increasing government savings—and therefore mai ntaining fiscal discipline—-
is also essential for containing the risks regardin g current account deficit. 
Controlling the budget expenditures during 2010 as envisaged in the Medium 
Term Program (MTP) is a major step towards this dir ection. Maintaining the 
fiscal discipline in the period ahead would enhance  the impact of the 
measures taken for both price and financial stabili ty. 21. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price  stability in the period ahead. To 
this end, the impact of the measures taken by the C BT and other institutions 
on the inflation outlook will be considered careful ly. Strengthening the 
commitment to fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda would support 
the improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thu s facilitate macroeconomic 
and price stability. In this respect, timely implem entation of the structural 
reforms envisaged by the MTP and the European Union  accession process 
remains to be of utmost importance. 