No: 2010 – 19 
29 June 2010 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: June 17, 2010 
 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices decreased by 0.36 percent in May  and annual inflation 
declined by 1.09 percentage points to 9.1 percent. The fall in annual inflation 
was largely due to plunging unprocessed food prices , as noted in the May 
summary of the Monetary Policy Committee (the Commi ttee) Meeting. Prices 
in other categories portrayed a favorable outlook a s well, while core inflation 
indicators continued to be consistent with medium-t erm targets. 
2. Changes in unprocessed food prices had a major i mpact on food prices in 
May. Prices of fresh vegetables dropped by 34.6 per cent with the favorable 
supply conditions. In addition, the announcement of  less restrictive import 
regulations for red meat brought meat prices down, contributing to the 
downward pressure on food prices. Accordingly, the direct impact of meat 
prices on annual CPI inflation was down from 1.9 in  April to 1.6 percentage 
points in May. Early observations suggest that the decline in annual food 
inflation has continued into June.  
3. Despite the recent fall in meat prices, the cumu lative increase over the past 
one year continued to have an adverse impact on cat ering prices. On the other 
hand, annual rent inflation continued to trend stea dily down, while falling 
mobile call rates helped lower the annual rate of i ncrease in prices of services. 
Overall, the average rate of increase in prices of services slowed further in 
seasonally adjusted terms. 
4. Despite rising solid fuel prices, energy prices remained flat for the second 
consecutive month amid falling international oil pr ices. However, annual 
energy inflation continued to rise on the back of t he low base effect from 2009. 
The Committee has noted that this base effect-drive n increase would end in 
June, and expects the annual rate of increase in en ergy prices to decelerate 
by the second half of 2010 unless there is a sizabl e increase in oil prices. 
5. The year-on-year increase in core goods (goods e xcluding food, energy, 
alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) slowed to 4. 84 percent. Both the 
easing of commodity prices and the weakening of the  euro contributed to the 
downtrend of annual core goods inflation, leading t o some moderation in core inflation indicators. It should be noted that the b ase effects from last year’s tax 
incentives that drove annual core goods inflation h igher during March and April 
would reverse in June, July and October and help im prove core inflation 
indicators. 
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. Recent data suggest that the recovery in economi c activity is ongoing. 
Industrial production grew by 0.8 percent month-on- month during April in 
seasonally adjusted terms, up by 2 percent from the  first quarter average. 
Indicators for May show that the economy continues to recover, albeit more 
slowly. Yet, the Committee emphasized that producti on is still below pre-crisis 
levels. 
7. Domestic demand growth is relatively stable. The  Committee members noted 
that production growth is stronger in sectors more sensitive to domestic 
demand. Production and imports data indicate that p rivate consumption 
demand continued to recover moderately during the s econd quarter. 
Consumer confidence indices and new order data also  confirm this outlook. 
The slow yet steady improvement in the labor market  and the favorable credit 
market developments are supporting the recovery in private consumption 
demand. 
8. Investment demand continues to recover, although  investments remain below 
pre-crisis levels. The production of capital goods excluding vehicles continues 
to grow, while imports of capital goods remain on t he rise. The Committee 
expects that growing domestic demand and lower comm ercial loan rates 
would continue to support the investment recovery. Yet, the Committee noted 
that new order and confidence indices fell, albeit modestly, during May and 
June amid mounting problems in the euro area, and i ndicated that downside 
risks to the pace of domestic demand growth should not be underestimated. 
9. Uncertainty regarding foreign demand has been in creasing. The export 
quantity index excluding gold continued to recover gradually during April in 
seasonally adjusted terms, whereas recent survey in dicators signal slowing 
export orders. Medium-term growth outlook of the Eu ro area has recently been 
revised down amid severe cutbacks in government spe nding aiming at 
restoring budget balances in several European count ries. Therefore, foreign 
demand is likely to recover gradually, and it would  take a while before 
industrial capacity utilization rates return to pre -crisis levels. 
10. Although employment conditions continue to impr ove, unemployment rates 
remain at elevated levels. Seasonally adjusted data  indicate that non-farm 
employment continued to recover in March. Weak fore ign demand continued to restrain industrial employment, while non-farm e mployment rose further 
owing to the recovery in construction and services sectors. Nevertheless, the 
Committee reiterated that the high level of unemplo yment rates would 
continue to contain unit labor costs. 
 
  Monetary Policy and Risks 
11. The Committee noted that the fall in unprocesse d food prices and easing 
commodity prices have led to a more favorable infla tion outlook than 
envisaged in the April Inflation Report, which is a lso having a positive impact 
on inflation expectations. Annual unprocessed food inflation is expected to 
further decline in June. Committee members have sta ted that the fall in fruit 
and vegetable prices partly reflect temporary favor able supply conditions due 
to early harvest of summer products, while the decl ine in meat prices can be 
attributed to more durable factors. Besides favorab le developments in food 
prices, oil prices have been lower than envisaged i n the April Inflation Report, 
leading to a downward revision in the short-term in flation forecasts. 
12. The Committee members indicated that the favora ble outlook in inflation is not 
only confined to food and energy prices, as core go ods and services inflation 
have been also moderating recently. It was stated t hat, given the 
developments in cost and demand factors, core infla tion would remain at 
levels below the year-end target and consistent wit h the medium-term targets. 
13. The Committee indicated that countercyclical mo netary and fiscal policies 
have been continuing to support the recovery in eco nomic activity. Recent 
data releases suggest that the production in sector s that are sensitive to 
domestic demand continues to increase. Credit devel opments indicate a 
similar outlook. The compression of spreads between  business lending rates 
and demand deposit rates and the ongoing recovery i n loans to small- and 
medium-sized enterprises since the beginning of the  year, suggest that the 
credit conditions have been improving steadily. 
14. The Committee indicated that, notwithstanding t he relatively stable domestic 
demand, uncertainties regarding the pace of economi c recovery have become 
more significant. Heightened debt sustainability co ncerns in Greece and many 
other European countries have been increasing the d ownside risks regarding 
the recovery in Europe—our major trade partner. The  significant depreciation 
of the Euro could adversely affect the competitiven ess of exports. Moreover, 
these developments have the potential to affect dom estic demand adversely 
through the expectations channel. In fact, leading indicators suggest that 
business and consumer confidence have slightly mode rated in June. 
According to the Committee members, it would be ear ly at this stage to change the stance of the monetary policy; however, the impacts of the 
problems regarding global economy on the domestic e conomic activity should 
be monitored closely in the forthcoming period.  
15. In light of these developments, the Committee r eiterated that it may be 
necessary to maintain policy rates at current level s for some time, and to keep 
them at low levels for a long period.  
16. The Committee will continue to monitor fiscal p olicy developments closely 
while formulating monetary policy. Should the fisca l rule—which is to be 
adopted at the beginning of 2011—be implemented dec isively as envisaged, it 
would contribute to the decline in risk premiums, a nd by decreasing 
government borrowing costs enhance the effectivenes s of monetary policy.  
Since the second half of 2009, economic activity ha s been stronger than 
envisaged in the Medium Term Program (MTP), leading  to a better than 
expected performance in budget revenues. Using this  fiscal space resulting 
from the cyclical factors mostly to reduce the gove rnment debt, as implied by 
the fiscal rule, would facilitate demand management  and ease the need for 
indirect tax hikes, therefore providing more room t o conduct countercyclical 
monetary policy. 
17. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price  stability in the period ahead. 
Strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline a nd the structural reform 
agenda in the medium term would support the relativ e improvement of 
Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thus facilitate macroe conomic and price stability. 
In this respect, timely implementation of the struc tural reforms envisaged by 
the Medium Term Program and the European Union acce ssion process 
remains to be of utmost importance. 