 
No: 2010 – 17  
31 May 2010 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: May 18, 2010 
 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices increased by 0.60 percent in Apr il. Annual inflation was up 
0.63 percentage points yielding a rate of 10.19 per cent. The increase in 
annual CPI inflation and core inflation indicators was largely driven by the low 
base effect from last year’s tax incentives, as not ed in previous reports. 
Adjusted for tax changes, underlying inflation rema ins stable. 
2. Developments particularly in red meat prices hav e been significantly affecting 
food prices. Despite having slowed in March, the ra te of increase in 
unprocessed red meat prices accelerated markedly in  April (by 5.77 percent), 
leading to a further rise in processed meat prices.  Accordingly, as of April, the 
first round impact of meat prices added a total of 1.9 percentage points to 
annual CPI inflation. 
3. The measures taken at the end of April regarding  meat import regulations are 
likely to reverse the run-up in meat prices in comi ng months. In fact, early 
observations suggest that unprocessed red meat pric es have been slightly 
down during the first half of May. Moreover, the ma ssive flow of products into 
the market indicates that vegetable prices may fall  markedly in May. In this 
respect, the Monetary Policy Committee (the Committ ee) noted that 
unprocessed food prices may decline significantly i n May.  
4. Energy prices remained practically flat during A pril. However, annual energy 
inflation rose by 1.49 percentage points to 11.75 p ercent on the back of the 
base effects from falling commodity prices in the f irst few months of 2009. 
Base effects on the annual energy inflation will co ntinue to be strong in May.  
5. The year-on-year increase in core goods prices ( goods excluding food, 
energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) rose  for the second 
consecutive month owing to the base effect from the  tax cuts on durable 
goods in 2009. By contrast, the year-on-year increa se in other goods prices 
continued to trend downward to 1.72 percent in May.   
6. Both services prices and the annual rate of incr ease in services prices 
decreased amid the sharp drop in communication pric es (by 5.36 percent). Pursuant to the decision of the Information and Com munication Technologies 
Authority, postpaid rates have been reduced, while prepaid plans are now 
quoted in Turkish lira terms, which led to a sizabl e decrease in mobile call 
rates during April. This brought services inflation  down by about 0.9 
percentage points. Meanwhile, soaring meat prices c ontinued to weigh on 
catering prices, while annual rent inflation contin ued along a steady 
downtrend.  
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation  
7. Recent data suggest that the recovery in economi c activity is ongoing. 
Industrial production grew by 0.9 percent month-on- month during March in 
seasonally adjusted terms. The industrial productio n index rose by 17.2 
percent year-on-year during the first quarter of 20 10, supporting the double-
digit growth forecast for the first quarter. April’ s capacity utilization data and 
other leading indicators point to further recovery in economic activity over the 
second quarter of 2010. Yet, with the waning of bas e effects, annual growth 
rates would gradually decline after the second quar ter. 
8. Domestic demand is following a stable growth tre nd. Countercyclical monetary 
and fiscal policies are having a more noticeable ef fect on domestic demand, 
with sectors more sensitive to domestic demand expe riencing relatively 
stronger growth performances. Sectors with strong l inkages to non-durable 
goods manufacturing and construction have been on t he rebound. Commercial 
loan and employment data indicate that the recovery  is more pronounced in 
the services sector, which is more sensitive to dom estic demand, compared to 
the industrial sector. 
9. Both the increase in labor compensation driven b y employment growth and the 
favorable developments across credit markets are su pporting the recovery in 
private consumption. The rise in consumption-relate d tax intakes as well as 
the production and import data for consumer goods i ndicates that private 
consumption demand continued to grow during the fir st quarter. The 
Committee noted that, after having declined during the second half of 2009 
following the tax cut-driven massive first-half inc rease, domestic sales of 
automobiles were back on the rise in the first quar ter of 2010. Recent data 
from consumer confidence indices, new order indices  and domestic sales of 
automobiles suggest that consumption is likely to i ncrease further in the 
second quarter.  
10. Production and imports data for capital goods i ndicate that private investment 
demand continued to recover in the first quarter of  2010. According to the 
Business Tendency Survey, the investment sentiment continues to improve, while the Bank Loans’ Tendency Survey reveals that the developments in the 
investment-driven loan demand has not made a negati ve contribution to the 
total business loan demand for the first time in a long while during the first 
quarter. Thus, investments are expected to grow mod erately further in coming 
months. Yet, the global growth outlook continues to  dampen economic activity, 
particularly in sectors that are relatively more se nsitive to foreign demand, 
such as export-oriented industrial sectors and rela ted services sectors. 
Therefore, given the weak global growth outlook, in sufficient and uncertain 
aggregate demand is likely to restrain new investme nts in the manufacturing 
industry, while investment demand would remain belo w pre-crisis levels for 
some time. 
11. Recent developments indicate that uncertainties  regarding foreign demand 
would last for a long period. The export quantity i ndex was down 2.1 percent 
year-on-year during the first quarter; yet, excludi ng gold, there is a gradual 
recovery in exports. The Committee emphasized that the growth outlook for 
export markets has not gained traction yet and the recovery in exports would 
be gradual, also noting that the exchange rate move ments driven by ongoing 
concerns regarding the Euro area add to the uncerta inties regarding foreign 
demand. Thus, despite the steady recovery in domest ic demand, it would take 
a while before industrial capacity utilization rate s return to pre-crisis levels. 
12. Although employment conditions continue to impr ove, unemployment rates 
remain at high levels. Seasonally adjusted data ind icate that non-farm 
employment continued to recover in the first quarte r. Weak foreign demand 
continued to restrain industrial production, while non-farm employment 
surpassed pre-crisis levels on the back of the reco very in construction and 
services sectors. Nevertheless, the Committee indic ated that the high level of 
unemployment rates compared to pre-crisis levels co ntinue to contain 
pressures on unit labor costs. 
 
  Monetary Policy and Risks 
13. The Committee indicated that the effects of the  countercyclical monetary and 
fiscal policy have been increasingly evident on dom estic demand. Consumer 
confidence and employment conditions continue to im prove, while the 
production in sectors that are sensitive to domesti c demand is displaying a 
steady uptrend. This view is supported by the rapid  increase in consumption 
goods imports and the relatively higher capacity ut ilization in domestically-
oriented manufacturing sectors.  
14. Credit market developments also confirm that th e recovery in domestic 
demand has been gaining traction. Historically low levels of bank lending rates and the gradually easing credit standards since the  beginning of the year 
suggest that credit market conditions have been inc reasingly supportive of the 
recovery in domestic demand. Particularly, the fact  that credit extended to 
small- and medium-sized enterprises has been recove ring since the beginning 
of the year indicates that credit conditions have b een normalizing. The 
Committee underscored that these favorable developm ents in credit markets 
are consistent with CBT’s strategy of gradually wit hdrawing some of the 
countercyclical measures adopted during the global crisis.    
15. The Committee stated that market liquidity cond itions have evolved as 
envisaged, and therefore, conditions are appropriat e to implement the first 
step of the technical rate adjustment described in the “Monetary Policy Exit 
Strategy” published on the 14 th  of April 2010. The Committee observed that 
current one-week repo auctions rates were fluctuati ng around 7 percent. To 
eliminate such fluctuations, the Committee decided to start conducting one-
week repo auctions via quantity auction with fixed interest rate. In this respect, 
the one-week repo rate, which becomes the new polic y rate, is set at 7 
percent—50 basis points above the overnight borrowi ng rates, as indicated in 
the exit strategy document. 
16. The Committee emphasized that the recovery in e xternal demand has not 
gained traction despite the upswing in domestic dem and. Heightened debt 
sustainability concerns in Greece and many other Eu ropean countries have 
been increasing the downside risks regarding the re covery in Europe—our 
major trade partner. Moreover, the significant depr eciation of the Euro has the 
potential to adversely affect the competitiveness o f exports. Therefore, 
considering the lingering uncertainties regarding g lobal economy, the 
Committee reiterated that it may be necessary to ma intain policy rates at 
current levels for some time, and to keep them at l ow levels for a long period.  
17. In sum, the Committee assessed that aggregate d emand conditions are 
currently not exerting significant upside pressures  on inflation. The rise in 
annual core inflation indicators during the last tw o months can be mainly 
attributed to the base effect stemming from the pre vious year’s temporary tax 
cuts on durable consumption goods. The Committee st ated that, excluding tax 
effects, there is no increase in the underlying inf lation trend, and hence, core 
inflation would continue to remain at levels below the end-year target. 
18. The forecast in the April Inflation Report envi saged that inflation would 
increase slightly during the second quarter, hover around 10 percent during 
the third quarter, and decline gradually starting f rom the fourth quarter as the 
impacts of the unprocessed food increases and tax h ikes die out. 
Nevertheless, recent developments suggest that the expected downward 
correction in vegetable and fruit prices may materi alize earlier than envisaged. In this respect, the Committee noted that unprocess ed food prices may display 
a significant decline in May, bringing inflation to  single digit levels. In other 
words, inflation in the following months may be low er than predicted in the 
April Inflation Report. Moreover, considering the p ossible impacts of measures 
regarding meat import regulations as well as the de cline in oil prices, the 
Committee assessed that end-year inflation may be c loser to the 6.5 target 
than forecasted in the Inflation Report. However, i t was stated that the 
significant gap between inflation expectations and the medium-term targets 
necessitates close monitoring of the pricing behavi or. 
19. The Committee will continue to monitor fiscal p olicy developments closely 
while formulating monetary policy. Should the fisca l rule—which is to be 
adopted at the beginning of 2011—be implemented dec isively as envisaged, it 
would contribute to the decline in risk premiums, a nd by decreasing 
government borrowing costs enhance the effectivenes s of monetary policy.  
Since the second half of 2009, economic activity ha s been stronger than 
envisaged in the Medium Term Program (MTP), leading  to a better than 
expected performance in budget revenues. Using this  fiscal space mostly to 
reduce the government debt, as implied by the fisca l rule, would facilitate 
demand management and ease the need for indirect ta x hikes, therefore 
providing more room to conduct countercyclical mone tary policy. 
20. Since the last quarter of 2008, the CBT, withou t prejudice to its primary 
objective of price stability, has focused on contai ning the adverse effects of the 
global crisis on the domestic economy—which has bee n achieved to a large 
extent. Monetary policy will continue to focus on p rice stability in the period 
ahead. Strengthening the commitment to fiscal disci pline and the structural 
reform agenda would support the improvement of Turk ey’s sovereign risk, and 
thus facilitate macroeconomic and price stability. In this respect, timely 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term 
Program and the European Union accession process re mains to be of utmost 
importance. 
 
 