 No: 2010 - 21 
15 July 2010 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: July 15, 2010 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç,  
M. Đbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to keep one-week 
repo auction rate (the policy rate) and overnight r ates unchanged as follows: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 7 percen t,   
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 6.50  percent, lending rate at 9 
percent, 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate at 2.50 percent, lending rate at 12 percent, 
d) The interest rate on overnight and one-week matu rity borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions at 8 percent. 
 
Recent data suggest that the recovery in economic a ctivity is ongoing. While 
domestic demand is displaying a relatively stable g rowth, there are signs of a partial 
slowdown in external demand. Therefore, it would ta ke a while before industrial capacity 
utilization rates return to pre-crisis levels. Alth ough employment conditions continue to 
improve, unemployment rates remain at high levels. Moreover, risks regarding global 
economy persist. 
The Committee has indicated that the core inflation  indicators remain consistent 
with the medium term targets. This development, cou pled with the fall in unprocessed 
food prices and easing commodity prices, has led to  a more favorable inflation outlook 
than envisaged in the April Inflation Report. 
In light of these developments, the Committee reite rated that it may be necessary 
to maintain policy rates at current levels for some  time, and to keep them at low levels 
for a long period. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance . 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
eight working days.  