No: 2010 – 29 
23 September  2010  
PRESS RELEASE ON REQUIRED RESERVES  
In addition to other measures regarding Turkish lira and foreign exchange 
(FX) liquidity  taken to alleviate the impact of global financial crisis that began to 
deepen in October 2008 on the domestic economy, the Central Bank of the Republic 
of Turkey (CBRT) had reduced the required reserve ratios for Turkish lira and FX 
liabilities by 1 and 2 percentage points to 5 and 9 percent on December 5, 2008 and 
October 16, 2009, respectively .  
In its press release of  April 14, 2010 on the monetary policy exit strategies, 
the CBRT announced that the measures related to FX liquidity would be gradually 
taken to the pre- crisis levels at a controlled pace, and if the liquidity shortage 
decreases noticeably and/or credit conditions improve, the Turkish lira and FX 
required reserve ratios might be increased gradually and at a controlled pace, and 
the required reserve ratios might be used more actively as a policy tool to mitigate the macroeconomic and financial risks.  
In this context, the FX r equired reserve ratio was  increased by 0.5 percentage 
point to reach 10 percent to be effective as of  the calculation periods of April 30, 
2010 and August 6, 2010, and thus FX liquidity was reduced approximately by USD 
1.4 billion.  
This time, taking the recent increase in credit volumes into account , the 
Turkish lira required reserve ratio was  increased by 0.5 percentage point from 5 
percent to 5.5 percent and FX required reserve ratio was increased by 1 percentage 
point from 10 percent to 11 percent. Thus, the FX and Turkish lira liquidity w ill be 
reduced approximately by USD 1.5 billion and TL 2.1 billion, respectively . 
Moreover,  the Turkish lira and FX required reserves had  been remunerated 
since August 8, 2001 and May 24, 2002, respectively. However, the remuneration of 
FX required reserves was terminated on December 5, 2008.  
It is stated  in Paragraph 19 of the monetary policy exit strategy announcement  
that “The main policy instrument of the Central Bank is the short -term interest rates. 
However, one of the lessons learned during the crisis is that other monetary policy 
instruments may be required to reduce the macroeconomic risks, especially when 
the economy is overheated. I n this context, depending on future developments, –  for 
example if the credit expansion speed exceeds desired levels –  the required reserve 
ratios may be used more actively as a policy tool to reduce the macroeconomic risks”. In this framework, to use the required reserve ratios as one of the policy tools to mitigate the macroeconomic and financial risks more actively in the future, the 
remuneration of Turkish lira required reserves is also terminated.  