No: 2010 – 14         
          26 April 2010 
 
  SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: April 13, 2010 
 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices increased by 0.58 percent in Mar ch. Annual inflation was 
down 0.57 percentage points yielding a rate of 9.56  percent. The decline in 
annual inflation was largely driven by the correcti on in vegetable prices, as 
envisaged in the Summary of the Monetary Policy Com mittee (the Committee) 
Meeting held in March.  
2. Developments in energy and food prices lead to f luctuations in inflation. After a 
sharp increase in February driven by adverse weathe r conditions, vegetable 
prices displayed a partial correction in March. On the other hand, meat prices 
continued to rise, albeit at a slower pace, and rem ained the main driver of 
higher food prices. In fact, the cumulative price h ike for unprocessed and 
processed meat products amounted to 9.85 and 8.86 p ercent, respectively, 
during the first quarter. Meanwhile, annual energy inflation continued to rise in 
March to 10.26 percent on the back of the low base effect from 2009 as well 
as higher fuel and water prices. Therefore, food an d energy items account for 
4.62 percentage points of annual inflation as of th e end of the first quarter. 
Food and energy prices are expected to remain volat ile over the upcoming 
period. 
3. Core inflation indicators rose markedly in March . The year-on-year increase in 
core goods prices (goods excluding food, energy, al coholic beverages, 
tobacco and gold) was largely attributable to the b ase effect resulting from the 
tax cuts on durable goods in 2009, and partly to de velopments in clothing 
prices. On the other hand, inflation in other goods  continued on a downtrend. 
4. Similarly, the annual rate of change in prices o f services increased significantly 
in March. While higher energy prices put further pr essure on transport 
services, rising meat prices continued to weigh on catering services. 
Moreover, landline call rates soared, accounting fo r about one-fourth of the 
increase in annual core inflation measured by the H  index. 
5. The Committee expects that core inflation indica tors would increase in April as 
well, owing to the temporary tax cuts of the previo us year, but would continue 
to remain at levels below the target.   
Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. Recent data releases suggest that the recovery i n economic activity is 
ongoing. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) expanded by 6 .0 percent year-on-
year during the fourth quarter of 2009, and by 2.3 percent quarter-on-quarter 
in seasonally adjusted terms, indicating that econo mic activity has continued 
to recover, albeit more modestly. 
7. On the spending side, public consumption grew ra pidly to bolster quarterly 
GDP growth, whereas private demand remained more mo derate. The run-up 
in public spending on goods and services was due to  advance payment of the 
health care expenditures for 2010 amid the improved  budget revenue 
performance. In this respect, the Committee emphasi zed that the marked 
increase in public spending is largely transitory. 
8. First-quarter data suggest that economic activit y continued to recover in 2010. 
In February, the seasonally adjusted industrial pro duction index increased by 
1.6 percent month-on-month. Industrial production i s expected to grow at a 
slightly faster pace during March. The Committee no ted that industrial 
production grew by 17.2 percent year-on-year during  January-February in 
calendar adjusted terms, and emphasized that annual  growth would reach 
double digits in the first quarter owing to the low  base effect from a year 
earlier. Nevertheless, the Committee reiterated tha t growth rates in seasonally 
adjusted terms are more informative for assessing t he underlying trend in 
economic activity. 
9. Domestic demand is following a gradual growth tr end. The effects of the policy 
rate cuts and increased public spending are having a more noticeable effect 
on domestic demand, with sectors more sensitive to domestic demand 
experiencing relatively stronger growth performance s. The recent pick-up in 
industrial production indicates that sectors with s trong linkages to non-durable 
goods manufacturing and construction have been on t he rebound. Commercial 
loan and employment data verify that the recovery i s more pronounced in the 
services sector, which is more sensitive to domesti c demand, compared to the 
industrial sector. 
10. Both the increase in labor compensation driven by employment growth and the 
favorable developments across credit markets are su pporting the recovery in 
private consumption. Production and imports data in dicate that private 
consumption demand continued to rise moderately dur ing the first quarter. The 
PMI new order index suggests that the recovery cont inued into the first 
quarter, albeit at a slower pace, which is also con firmed by the consumer 
confidence indices.  11. Production and imports data for capital goods s uggest that the recovery in 
private investment demand has yet to gain momentum.  The global growth 
outlook continues to dampen economic activity, part icularly in sectors that are 
relatively more sensitive to foreign demand, such a s export-oriented industrial 
sectors and related services sectors. Following the  recent crisis, 
manufacturing firms that mostly serve external mark ets are operating at lower 
capacity than local market-oriented firms. Accordin gly, indicators of resource 
utilization, such as capacity utilization in the ma nufacturing industry and hours 
worked per capita, remain weak. Investment demand i s expected to continue 
to grow moderately in the upcoming period. Yet, giv en the weak global growth 
outlook, insufficient and uncertain aggregate deman d is likely to restrain new 
investments in the manufacturing industry. Therefor e, the Committee expects 
investment demand to remain below pre-crisis levels  for a while. 
12. Uncertainty regarding foreign demand remains. T he export quantity index was 
down 8.6 percent year-on-year during January-Februa ry; yet, excluding gold, 
the index remained flat quarter-on-quarter. The Com mittee emphasized that 
the growth outlook for export markets, particularly  the euro area, remains 
weak, and reiterated that the recovery in exports w ould be gradual, which is 
also confirmed by the recent trends in leading indi cators for exports. Thus, it 
would take a while before industrial capacity utili zation rates return to pre-crisis 
levels. 
13. Although employment conditions continue to impr ove, unemployment rates still 
remain at high levels. Seasonally adjusted data ind icate that non-farm 
employment continues to recover. Weak foreign deman d continued to restrain 
industrial employment, while non-farm employment re turned to pre-crisis 
levels owing to the recovery in construction and se rvices sectors. 
Nevertheless, the Committee expects unemployment to  remain well above 
pre-crisis levels for a long period, and therefore unit labor costs are not 
expected to face any significant upside pressures. 
 
Risks and Monetary Policy  
14. In light of above assessments, the Committee ha s indicated that the economic 
recovery is ongoing. The lagged effects of monetary  easing on domestic 
demand have become more pronounced, while the weak outlook for global 
growth has continued to dampen resource utilization  in the tradable sector. On 
balance, the Committee continues to expect the econ omic recovery to be 
gradual. 
15. The Committee indicated that inflation would ho ver significantly above the 
target for sometime owing to the base effects drive n by the temporary tax cuts and volatile unprocessed food prices during 2009. T emporary tax cuts 
implemented in March 2009, which were withdrawn par tly in June and fully in 
October, would lead to an increase in headline and core inflation rates during 
March and April, and a decrease during June, July a nd October of 2010.  
16. Inflation is expected to drop significantly in the last quarter of 2010 and the first 
quarter of 2011. The fall in the last quarter of 20 10 reflects the base effect 
driven by the indirect tax hikes and the sharp incr ease in food prices in the last 
quarter of 2009. Similarly, the impact of the tax h ikes, which added around 1.9 
percentage points to headline inflation in the firs t two months of 2010, would 
disappear during the first quarter of 2011. Accordi ngly, the Committee stated 
that inflation would revert back to a downward tren d as the temporary factors 
taper off starting in the last quarter of the year,  and converge to levels 
consistent with the targets by early 2011. 
17. The Committee has underscored that elevated lev els of inflation, albeit 
temporary, warrants close monitoring of price setti ng behavior.  Several 
adverse factors (such as unprocessed food and oil p rice increases, base 
effects and administered price hikes) have led to a  significant increase in 
inflation since the last quarter of 2009. Although these factors are temporary, 
they cause headline inflation to stay at elevated l evels for sometime, leading to 
an adverse impact on inflation expectations. Curren tly the pricing behavior, 
excluding items that are directly affected by cost push effects, does not reveal 
a deterioration that might endanger the achievement  of medium term targets. 
However, the Committee underscored that the CBT wil l not hesitate to take the 
necessary measures, should inflation expectations c ontinue to rise and lead to 
a deterioration in general price setting behavior. 
18. Although downside risks on global economic acti vity have been decreasing, 
they have not disappeared completely. Rising budget  deficits and ongoing 
problems in credit, real estate and labor markets a cross developed economies 
continue to pose downside risks for the recovery in  global activity. The 
Committee stated that, should the global conditions  deteriorate again, and 
consequently delay the domestic recovery, the polic y rates would be kept 
constant for an extended period. 
19. The Committee indicated that uncertainties rega rding the lagged effects of the 
strong monetary stimulus have been leading to upsid e risks on both domestic 
and global economic activity. According to the Comm ittee members, the 
recovery in domestic demand has been relatively rob ust. Therefore, a faster-
than-envisaged recovery in external demand would le ad to a rapid narrowing 
in the resource utilization gap, which, coupled wit h cost push pressures, could 
delay the attainment of medium term inflation targe ts. In this respect, it was 
stated that necessary measures would be taken to en sure the alignment of medium term inflation with the targets, should the recovery in economic 
activity turn out to be faster than expected.   
20. Prospects regarding the pace of growth in devel oping economies, especially in 
China and India, have been posing upside risks rega rding commodity prices. 
Increasing share of these economies in total world demand has been creating 
additional pressures on commodity prices. If commod ity prices rise faster than 
expected in the forthcoming period and delay the di sinflation, then the 
Committee will implement the policies required to e liminate the risks related to 
price setting behavior. 
21. The Committee will continue to monitor fiscal p olicy developments closely 
while formulating monetary policy. Since the second  half of 2009, economic 
activity has been stronger than envisaged in the Me dium Term Program 
(MTP), leading to a better than expected performanc e in budget revenues. 
Using this fiscal space mostly to reduce the govern ment debt, as implied by 
the fiscal rule, would facilitate the demand manage ment and ease the need for 
indirect tax hikes, therefore providing more room t o conduct countercyclical 
monetary policy. In this respect, the Committee bel ieves that, should the goals 
set out in the Medium Term Program be implemented t hrough institutional and 
structural progress, such as enacting and establish ing the fiscal rule, it would 
be possible to keep policy rates at single digit le vels over the medium term. 
22. In light of these assessments, and considering the normalization in the money 
and credit markets, the Committee has decided to gr adually remove the 
liquidity measures implemented during the crisis. I n this context, the 
Committee members fully agreed that publishing a co mprehensive technical 
note regarding the exit strategy, the day after the  meeting, would enhance 
predictability of the monetary policy. However, des pite recent improvements, 
lingering problems across the global economy are no t resolved completely. 
Accordingly, the Committee has stated that it may b e necessary to maintain 
policy rates at current levels for sometime, and to  keep them at low levels for a 
long period. 
23. Since the last quarter of 2008, the CBT, withou t prejudice to its primary 
objective of price stability, has focused on contai ning the adverse effects of the 
global crisis on the domestic economy—which has bee n achieved to a large 
extent. Monetary policy will continue to focus on p rice stability in the period 
ahead. Strengthening the commitment to fiscal disci pline and the structural 
reform agenda would support the improvement of Turk ey’s sovereign risk, and 
thus facilitate macroeconomic and price stability. In this respect, timely 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term 
Program and the European Union accession process re mains to be of utmost 
importance. 