 
 No: 2010 - 34 
15 October 2010 
 
 
PRESS RELEASE ON THE PRACTICES RELATED TO FOREIGN E XCHANGE 
MARKETS AND OPEN MARKET TRANSACTIONS 
 
1. As is known, with the aim of avoiding negative i mpacts of developments in the 
global economy on the financial stability of our co untry, the Central Bank of the 
Republic of Turkey (CBRT) has taken several measure s related to foreign 
exchange and Turkish Lira liquidity since October 2 008. The said measures 
have provided significant support to restoring fina ncial stability.  
 
2. With the beginning of the normalization process in international markets, the 
exit strategy, which includes withdrawing measures taken during the crisis, 
was announced to the public in the press release of  14 April 2010 on the 
“Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey Monetary Po licy Exit Strategy”. In the 
said press release, the CBRT declared that it plans  to take measures related 
to foreign exchange liquidity to pre-crisis levels as normalization in global 
markets becomes significant. In this framework, con sidering the improvement 
in international liquidity conditions and the incre ase in foreign exchange 
liquidity of the banking system in the recent perio d, the intermediary 
functioning of the CBRT in the Foreign Exchange and  Banknotes Markets 
Foreign Exchange Deposit Market is suspended. Even though the 
intermediary functioning of the CBRT in the foreign  exchange deposit market 
is over, the banks will still be able to borrow for eign exchange deposits from 
the CBRT within their limits. However, the maturity  of the said transactions will 
be one week, as was the case before October 2008. 
 
3. On the other hand, during the global crisis weak ening of capital flows all 
around the world slowed down capital inflows to our  country, thus causing an 
increase in liquidity shortage and as the liquidity  shortage became permanent, 
starting from 19 June 2009 in addition to the 1-wee k repo auctions, the basic funding instrument of the CBRT, 3-month repo auctio ns were introduced. As 
stated in the 17 th  paragraph of the exit strategy announcement publis hed on 
14 April 2010, “As long as the liquidity shortage c ontinues at high levels, 
although the amount may change depending on liquidi ty level, three-month 
repo auctions will continue to be a regular funding  instrument”. In order to 
implement the existing liquidity management framewo rk effectively, the 
liquidity shortage funded by 1-week repo auctions s hould not be below 4-5 
billion Turkish Liras (TL). As of 14 October 2010, the outstanding amount 
funded by repo auctions was 13 billion TL, of which  9 billion TL belongs to 1-
week repo auctions. In the upcoming period, due to ongoing FX purchases of 
the CBRT and the Treasury’s reduction of its cash a ccount balance within the 
CBRT, the liquidity shortage is expected to decline  from time to time. Thus, 
considering that 3-month repo funding is no longer needed, those auctions 
have been terminated.  
 
4. To support the primary dealership system, the CB RT has provided overnight 
or weekly repo facilities since 3 September 2002 at  preannounced interest 
rates to primary dealers.  Given the exit strategy framework, as the gradual 
technical interest rate adjustment process has been  achieved, the main 
funding instrument of the CBRT will be the 1-week r epo auctions. On the other 
hand, since other short-term lending and borrowing options are implemented 
at overnight maturity, in order to harmonize maturi ties of similar liquidity 
management tools, the repo facility, which is exten ded to primary dealers 
within the open market operations framework, will o nly be available at 
overnight maturity starting from 15 October 2010.      