No: 2010 - 28 
16 September 2010 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: September 16, 2010 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç,  
M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has deci ded to set the short 
term interest rates as follows: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) was kept constant  at 7 percent, 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate was reduced  from 6.50 percent to 
6.25 percent, while lending rate was reduced from 9 pe rcent to 8.75 percent, 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate was reduced from 2.50 to 2.25 percent, while lending rate was 
reduced from 12 to 11.75 percent, 
d) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturi ty borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions was r educed from 8 percent to  
7.75 percent. 
 
Recent data releases are in line with the outlook presen ted in the July Inflation 
Report. Economic activity is on a milder recovery path f ollowing a strong growth in the 
second quarter. Uncertainties regarding external demand  persist, while domestic 
demand displays a relatively stable outlook. Therefore,  it would take a while before 
industrial capacity utilization rates return to their p re-crisis levels. Although employment 
conditions continue to improve, unemployment rates rema in at high levels. 
The Committee has restated that inflation would increa se temporarily in the short 
term before reverting to a declining path starting fr om the last quarter of the year. Core 
inflation indicators are expected to remain consistent wi th the medium-term targets. 
In light of these developments, the Committee has reit erated that it would be 
necessary to maintain policy rates at current levels for so me time, and to keep them at 
low levels for a long period. On the other hand, the  Committee has assessed that 
current liquidity conditions are appropriate to implem ent the second step of the technical 
rate adjustment mentioned in the “Monetary Policy Exi t Strategy” published on April 14, 
2010 and decided to change the interest rates as indicate d above. Moreover, the 
Committee has indicated that it would be appropriate to proceed with the measures 
outlined in the exit strategy that were envisaged to be implemented by the end of 2010. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
eight working days.  