No: 2010 – 01 
14 January 2010 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: January 14, 2010 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç, 
M. İbrahim Turhan, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
Absent:  Abdullah Yava ş (on duty) 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has d ecided to keep policy 
rates unchanged as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 6.50  percent, lending rate at 9 
percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate at 2.50 percent, lending rate at 12 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week matu rity borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions at 8 percent. 
 
Recent data releases suggest that the moderate reco very in the economic 
activity is ongoing. However, there are still uncer tainties regarding the aggregate 
demand, and the capacity utilization and employment  conditions are expected to take a 
long time to fully recover. The Committee has indic ated that inflation would rise 
significantly in the next two months due to tax adj ustments and base effects, hovering 
above the target for some time. Yet, the underlying  trend implied by core inflation 
indicators is expected to remain at levels consiste nt with medium term targets. In this 
respect, it has been emphasized that inflation woul d display a declining trend once the 
temporary factors die out. 
The Committee has noted that credit markets have co ntinued to improve in 
response to the monetary easing and the improvement s in global risk perceptions. 
However, lingering problems across the global econo my are not resolved completely 
and there are still uncertainties regarding the str ength of the recovery. Accordingly, the 
Committee has emphasized that it would be necessary  to keep policy rates at low levels 
for a long period of time. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance . 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
eight working days.  