No: 2010 – 32
1 October 2010

PRESS RELEASE ON
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE BUYING AUCTIONS

1. In its press release of 10 December 2009 on “Monetary and Exchange Rate
Policy for 2010”, the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (CBRT)
announced the general framework of the exchange rate policies envisaged for
2010 and declared that the foreign exchange buying auctions held with the
aim of building up foreign exchange reserves would continue. As stated in the
said press release, although there is no exchange rate level to maintain in a
floating exchange rate regime, a strong foreign exchange reserve position is
very important for emerging economies like our country to curb the
unfavorable effects of potential internal and external shocks and to boost
confidence in the country. Therefore, the CBRT holds foreign exchange buying
auctions to build up reserves at times when foreign exchange supply
increases relative to foreign exchange demand.
2. The financial crisis, which started in 2007 and deepened after September
2008 affected our country’s financial markets. The said crisis once again
underlined the importance of having a strong foreign exchange reserve
position.

During the crisis measures were immediately taken to alleviate

problems of the banking system related to foreign exchange liquidity through
our strong reserves accumulated over the years. The problems related to
foreign exchange liquidity in this period were not country-specific. Therefore,
while countries signed mutual agreements in order to eliminate liquidity
problems, international institutions also systemically tried to establish
mechanisms that would eliminate potential liquidity problems of this extent.
However, foreign exchange reserves are still the most significant safeguard for
a country in terms of financial stability.
3. Hence, on 4 August 2009, the CBRT resumed foreign exchange buying
auctions, which had been suspended during the crisis. In its press release of 2

August 2010 it announced that in order to accelerate foreign exchange
reserve accumulation, the maximum daily amount to be purchased in auctions
would be increased to an auction amount of USD 40 million and an optional
selling amount of USD 40 million; from an auction amount of USD 30 million
and an optional selling amount USD 30 million, respectively.
4. As meticulous as it has been in minimizing the impact on supply and demand
conditions in the foreign exchange market, the Central Bank has been buying
foreign exchange via transparent foreign exchange buying auctions with
preannounced terms and conditions. . Although the aim is to run auctions in
line with the pre-announced program, in case of unexpected significant
developments pertaining to foreign exchange supply, amendments to auction
programs can be made with prior notice. Despite several changes to auction
programs, the aim is to keep auction programs untouched as much as
possible.
5. However, the whole world is undergoing an extraordinary period. There may
be abrupt changes in the outlook of global financial markets and the risk
appetite, which may, in turn, cause significant fluctuations in capital flows
towards emerging countries, including Turkey. Therefore, in order to benefit
from capital inflows more effectively with a view to strengthening foreign
exchange reserves and to enhancing resilience against volatile capital flows,
the CBRT decided to alter the method of foreign exchange buying auctions to
be effective as of 4 October 2010. Accordingly;
i.

The daily foreign exchange buying auctions will continue to be held as
announced in the CBRT’s press release of 2 August 2010. In other
words, within the framework of the daily foreign exchange buying
auctions, the maximum daily amount to be purchased in auctions will be
USD 80 million, with USD 40 million of auction amount and USD 40
million of optional selling amount, as long as the amounts set on 3
August 2010 are kept unchanged.

ii.

However, in case liquidity conditions improve on the back of
developments in global financial markets and capital inflows strengthen,
the CBRT may raise the maximum daily amount to be purchased

through auctions in order to accelerate foreign exchange reserve
accumulation. In case the CBRT decides to accelerate foreign
exchange purchases, the maximum additional amount to be purchased
in any week will be posted on Reuters page CBTQ, at 11.00 on the first
working day of the respective week.
iii.

In addition to the regular foreign exchange buying auctions, the portion
of preannounced amount that may be bought within the day will be
posted on Reuters page CBTQ at 13.30 and the auction will be held
between 13.35-13.45. However, on days when the CBRT makes
additional purchases, successful bidders will not have the right to sell
an optional amount.

iv.

For example, in addition to the regular foreign exchange buying
auctions, in order to accelerate reserve accumulation in a period of
expected strong capital inflows, the procedure below will be followed;
a. If a decision is made to buy an additional amount of USD 300
million in a week, this amount will be announced to the public
on the first working day of that week at 11.00.
b. If it is decided to buy 20 percent of the additional amount in the
first working day of the week, at 13.30 it will be announced
that, in addition to the 40 million that has been bought
regularly, an additional 60 million will be bought, which
amounts to USD 100 million.
c. The auction will be held between 13.35-13.45.
d. However, in contrast to the regular foreign exchange buying
auctions, the successful bidder will not have the right to sell an
optional amount.
e. In this auction, up to USD 100 million will be bought, in which
case the additional amount to be purchased will be USD 60
million.
f. Accordingly, for the rest of the week, a maximum of USD 240
million will be bought in total, in addition to the regular foreign
exchange buying auction amounts.
g. If no decision is made for an additional purchase the following
day, only the regular foreign exchange auction will be held. In

other words, in the auction, which will be held the next day,
USD 40 million will be purchased and an optional amount of
USD 40 million will be granted to successful bidders. As no
additional purchase has been made that day, again a
maximum amount of USD 240 million in total may be bought
during the rest of the week.
h. If the CBRT decides to make an additional purchase other than
the regular foreign exchange buying auctions, the additional
amount will be announced to the public at 11.00 on the first
working day of the next week.
6. It was decided to hold an additional foreign exchange purchase within the
week beginning with 4 October 2010, to accelerate reserve accumulation and
USD 300 million is set as the maximum additional amount to be purchased.
7. Although guidelines for foreign exchange buying auctions have not been
changed, these guidelines are explained again below for informational
purposes:
i.

Only banks authorized to operate in the Foreign Exchange and
Banknotes Markets in the CBRT are eligible to participate in auctions.

ii.

No auction will be held on days when payments systems are closed in
the USA even if it is a working day in Turkey, on half-working days and
on days when direct foreign exchange intervention by the CBRT takes
place prior to the start of the auction.

iii.

Auctions will be held under the multiple price auction method.

iv.

The minimum amount that can be bid for the auction is USD 1 million
and multiples thereof. The maximum amount that can be bid is limited
to the total amount to be bought in the auction.

v.

Banks will not be able to change their bid amounts and prices during
the auction.

vi.

If there is more than one bid at the price where the auction is finalized,
the distribution will be made on pro-rata basis.

vii.

The banks willing to participate in the auctions will send their bids
through the EFT (Electronic Fund Transfer) System by stating the
amount and price.

viii.

After the auction has been finalized, the total bid amount, average
price, maximum price and minimum price related to the auction will be
posted on Reuters page CBTQ. Following this announcement, banks
may exercise their right to sell the optional amount till 14.00 in the
regular foreign exchange buying auctions in which no additional
purchase is made. The optional amount used will also be announced on
the same page.

ix.

No transaction commission will be charged in the auctions.

x.

Institutions that do not fulfill their obligations arising from the auctions
will be subject to sanctions specified in the Instructions of the Foreign
Exchange and Banknotes Markets.

8. As in previous cases, developments pertaining to foreign exchange supply will
be closely monitored in the upcoming period and in the event of unforeseen
developments, not only daily auction/optional selling amounts may be changed
in either direction with prior notice, but also auctions may be suspended for a
short or long period.

