No: 2010 – 11 
13 April 2010 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: April 13, 2010 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç 
M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has d ecided to keep policy 
rates unchanged as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 6.50  percent, lending rate at 9 
percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate at 2.50 percent, lending rate at 12 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week matu rity borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions at 8 percent. 
 
Recent data releases suggest that the recovery in e conomic activity is ongoing. 
Domestic demand is following a gradual growth trend  despite lingering uncertainty 
regarding external demand, suggesting that it would  take a while before industrial 
capacity utilization rates return to pre-crisis lev els. Although employment conditions 
continue to improve, unemployment rates remain at h igh levels.  
The Committee has noted that annual inflation rate would hover significantly 
above the target for sometime before reverting back  to a downward trend as the 
temporary factors taper off starting in the last qu arter of the year. Inflation rate would 
converge to levels consistent with the targets by e arly 2011. Core inflation indicators 
would increase in April as well, due to temporary t ax cuts of the previous year, but 
would continue to remain at levels below the target . The Committee has indicated that 
elevated levels of inflation, albeit temporary, war rants close monitoring of price setting 
behavior. 
Observing these developments and the normalization in the money and credit 
markets, the Committee has decided to gradually rem ove the liquidity measures 
implemented during the crisis. However, despite rec ent improvements, lingering 
problems across the global economy are not resolved  completely. Accordingly, the 
Committee has stated that it may be necessary to ma intain policy rates at current levels 
for some time, and to keep them at low levels for a  long period.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance . 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
eight working days.  