No: 2010 – 10 
30 March 2010 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: March 18, 2010 
 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices increased by 1.45 percent in Feb ruary, pushing annual 
inflation up by 1.94 percentage points to 10.13 per cent. As noted in February’s 
Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) Meeting S ummary, the recent 
rise in annual inflation was driven by temporary fa ctors such as soaring 
unprocessed food prices, lagged impacts of tax adju stments, and base effects. 
In fact, core inflation indicators have continued t o hover at low levels, 
notwithstanding the rise in annual inflation. 
2. The steep increase in vegetable prices due to ad verse weather conditions and 
the ongoing surge in meat prices pushed annual unpr ocessed food inflation up 
by about 10 percentage points in February. Nonethel ess, there may be a 
correction in vegetable prices during March. 
3. Besides the developments in unprocessed food ite ms, price hikes in energy 
and tobacco also put upward pressure on inflation. Energy prices continued to 
increase in February on the back of higher bottled gas and auto LPG prices. 
Annual energy inflation is expected to rise further  in coming months owing to 
base effects. Meanwhile, tobacco inflation continue d to accelerate due to the 
spillover of January’s tax changes. 
4. By contrast, weak aggregate demand has dampened the pass-through of price 
hikes in food, energy and tobacco into overall pric ing trends. The end-
February annual inflation across core goods (exclud ing food, energy, alcoholic 
beverages, tobacco and gold) was a modest 2.17 perc ent. The low level of 
inflation in core goods was particularly driven by durable good items. 
5. The impact of higher food and energy prices on c atering and transport 
services became more significant, while prices of o ther services continued to 
rise at a slower pace. The Committee noted that, al though seasonally adjusted 
services inflation has been rising modestly for a w hile, underlying services 
inflation is consistent with the medium-term target s. Nevertheless, Committee 
members emphasized that overall pricing behavior ne eds to be closely 
monitored.  
   Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. Recent data releases suggest that a moderate rec overy in economic activity is 
ongoing. Industrial production grew by 12.1 percent  year-on-year in January, 
which is equivalent to 16.1 percent in calendar adj usted terms. The seasonally 
adjusted industrial production index was up 0.3 per cent month-on-month, 
pointing to ongoing yet slower growth. Leading indi cators suggest that 
industrial production has continued to recover in F ebruary and March. 
7. Domestic demand is following a gradual growth tr end. The recent growth in 
labor compensation and favorable developments acros s credit markets are 
supporting the recovery in private consumption. Pro duction and imports data 
indicate that private consumption demand increased moderately during the 
final quarter of 2009. Moreover, releases on consum er goods production in 
January signal an ongoing recovery in private consu mption demand. In 
addition, new order indices in the PMI show that th e recovery in private 
consumption demand continued into the first quarter , albeit at a slower pace, 
which is also supported by the flattening of consum er confidence indices. 
8. Production and imports data for capital goods su ggest that the recovery in 
private investment demand has yet to gain momentum.  Indicators of resource 
utilization, such as capacity utilization in the ma nufacturing industry and hours 
worked per capita, remain weak, while manufacturing  firms continue to view 
their production capacity as “more than sufficient” , considering their current 
order books and demand expectations. Investment dem and is expected to 
continue to grow moderately in the upcoming period.  Yet, insufficient and 
uncertain aggregate demand is likely to restrain ne w investments in the 
manufacturing industry, given the weak global growt h outlook. Accordingly, the 
Committee expects investment demand to remain below  pre-crisis levels for a 
while. 
9. Uncertainty regarding foreign demand remains. Th e Committee emphasized 
that the outlook for existing export markets, parti cularly the euro area, remains 
weak, and reiterated that the recovery in exports w ould be gradual, which is 
demonstrated by the recent trends in leading indica tors for exports. Thus, it 
will take a while before industrial capacity utiliz ation rates return to pre-crisis 
levels. 
10. Although employment conditions continue to impr ove, unemployment rates 
remain at high levels. Seasonally adjusted data for  December indicate that 
non-farm employment continues to recover. Weak fore ign demand continued 
to restrain industrial employment, while the recove ry in construction and 
services sectors helped non-farm employment return to pre-crisis levels.  11. Overall, recent data releases suggest that the economic recovery is ongoing. 
The lagged effects of monetary policy actions on do mestic demand have 
become more pronounced, while the weak outlook for global growth continues 
to dampen resource utilization in tradable sectors.  Overall, the Committee 
continues to expect the economic recovery to be gra dual. 
 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
12. Monetary policy decisions are based on the medi um-term outlook for inflation, 
rather than temporary price developments. However, the Committee members 
indicated that, for the purpose of managing expecta tions, it might be useful to 
inform economic agents about the likely path of inf lation in the short term, 
given that inflation currently hovers significantly  above the target.     
13. With the partial correction in unprocessed food  prices, the Committee 
members expect inflation to drop to single digit le vels in March. However, the 
Committee indicated that inflation would display fl uctuations in 2010 owing to 
the base effects driven by the temporary tax cuts a nd volatile unprocessed 
food prices during 2009. Temporary tax cuts impleme nted in March 2009, 
which were withdrawn partly in June and fully in Oc tober, would lead to rising 
inflation rates during March and April, and a decre ase in inflation rates during 
June and October of 2010. Moreover, unprocessed foo d inflation registered a 
historically high print in the last quarter of 2009 , following a historical low 
during the third quarter. These strong base effects  would likely lead to 
fluctuations in headline inflation throughout 2010,  therefore making it difficult to 
assess underlying trend inflation. In this respect,  the Committee underscored 
that economic agents should closely monitor the Cen tral Bank’s reports and 
statements regarding inflation developments.      
14. The Committee stated that the impact of the sha rp increases in unprocessed 
food prices during the last quarter of 2009 would e ase in the final quarter of 
2010. Likewise, the 1.9 percentage point impact of the recent tax hikes on 
inflation would dissipate during the January-Februa ry period of 2011. 
Accordingly, inflation would continue to hover sign ificantly above target for 
some time, however, it would then revert to a downw ard trend as the 
temporary factors taper off starting in the last qu arter of the year, and decline 
to levels consistent with inflation targets by earl y 2011. 
15. Core inflation indicators would increase in the  short term as well, especially 
during March and April, owing to the base effects d riven by the temporary tax 
cuts of the previous year. However, in line with th e modest recovery in 
aggregate demand conditions, core inflation indicat ors would continue to 
remain below the target. 16. Increasing headline inflation is having an adve rse impact on inflation 
expectations. The current state of aggregate demand  conditions is expected to 
dampen the pass-through of the rise in unprocessed food and administered 
prices on overall prices. Still, the Committee memb ers underscored the 
importance of closely monitoring price setting beha vior, given that Turkey has 
had to cope with high levels of inflation in the pa st.  
17. Credit markets have continued to improve in res ponse to the monetary easing. 
Committee members noted that easing financial condi tions have been 
strengthening the expansionary impact of monetary p olicy. Commercial loans 
have recovered significantly in the first two month s of the year, while the 
recovery in consumer loans has been relatively more  moderate. The 
Committee indicated that lagged impacts of the mone tary easing would 
continue to support the credit markets, yet high le vels of unemployment rates 
and relatively tight external financing conditions would restrain credit growth. 
18. The global economy continues to recover. Howeve r, the high levels of budget 
deficits on a global scale and ongoing problems in credit and real estate 
markets continue to pose downside risks on global a ctivity, particularly in 
developed economies.  
19. Overall, despite recent improvements, there are  still lingering problems across 
the global economy. Accordingly, the Committee has reiterated that it would 
be necessary to keep policy rates at low levels for  a long period of time. 
However, the CBT will not hesitate to tighten monet ary policy sooner than 
envisaged in the baseline scenario of the Inflation  Report, should the recent 
increase in inflation expectations lead to a deteri oration in price setting 
behavior. 
20. Increasing budget deficits on a worldwide scale , particularly across developed 
economies, continue to pose risks on inflation expe ctations and thus on 
longer-term global interest rates. In fact, recentl y, long-term interest rates 
across developed economies have been displaying sig nificant increases. 
Countries with relatively sounder banking systems a nd prudent fiscal policies 
would be more resilient against such risks. In this  respect, the Committee will 
continue to monitor fiscal policy developments clos ely while formulating 
monetary policy. Should the goals set out in the Me dium Term Program be 
implemented through institutional and structural im provements, rather than tax 
and administered price hikes, it would be possible to keep policy rates at 
single digit levels over the medium term. 
21. Since the last quarter of 2008, the CBT, withou t prejudice to its primary 
objective of price stability, has focused on contai ning the adverse effects of the 
global crisis on the domestic economy—which has bee n achieved to a large 
extent. Monetary policy will continue to focus on p rice stability in the period ahead. Strengthening the commitment to fiscal disci pline and the structural 
reform agenda would support the improvement of Turk ey’s sovereign risk, and 
thus facilitate macroeconomic and price stability. In this respect, timely 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term 
Program and the European Union accession process re mains to be of utmost 
importance. 