No: 2010 - 33 
                                                                                                                       14 October 2010   
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: October  14, 2010 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Durmuş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Başçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç ,  
M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu.  
 
The Monetary Policy Comm ittee (t he Committee) has decided to set the short term 
interest rates as follows : 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) was kept constant at 7 perc ent, 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate was reduced from 6.25 percent  to 5.75 
percent , while lending ra te was kept constant at  8.75 percent , 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m. ): Borrowing 
rate was reduced from 2.25 percent  to 1.75 percent , while lending rate was kept at 
11.75 percent,  
d) The interest rate on borrowing facilitie s provided for primary dealers via repo 
transactions was kept constant at 7.75 percent.  
 
Recent data releases suggest that e conomic activity  continues to recover . Uncertainties 
regarding external demand persist, while  domestic demand displays a relatively stronger  
outlook. It would take a while before industr ial capacity utilization rates return to their pre-crisis 
levels. Although employment conditions  continue to improve, unemployment rates remain at 
high levels.  It is expected that inflation would be on a declining path  in the forthcoming period , 
while c ore inflation would remain consistent with the medium -term targets.  
In light of these assessments , the Committee has reiterated that  it would be necessary 
to maintain policy rates at current levels  for some time, and to keep them at low levels for a long 
period . On the other hand, in order to enhance  the efficient functioning of the Turkish lira 
market, the Committee has decided to reduc e the borrowing rates  by 50 basis points . 
Expectations of more accommod ative monetary policies in developed economies have 
been leading to a surge in capital flows toward emerging markets . This development , coupled 
with the relative improvement in the creditworthiness of Turkey , exacerbates the risks re lated  to 
the divergence  between the domestic and external demand. While not yet a significant concern 
regarding financial stability, the Committee ha s indicated that these developments support  the 
implementation of the “exit strategy” measures. Therefore, the Committee has indic ated that it 
would be appropriate to proceed with the remaining measures outlined in the exit strategy that 
were envisaged to be implemented by the end of 2010.  Moreover, the Committee has judged 
that the 3 -month repo funding  is no longer needed . 
It should  be emphasized that any new data or information related to the inflation outlook 
may lead the Committee to revise its stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within eight 
working days.  