No: 2010 - 37 
      11 November 2010 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: November 11, 2010 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç,  
M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to set the short 
term interest rates as follows: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) was kept co nstant at 7 percent, 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate was red uced from 5.75 percent to 
1.75 percent, while lending rate was kept constant at 8.75 percent. The interest 
rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary d ealers via repo transactions 
was kept constant at 7.75 percent. 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate was reduced from 1.75 percent to 0 p ercent, while lending rate 
was kept at 11.75 percent. 
 
Recent data releases suggest that economic activity  continues to recover with 
the support of domestic demand. However, it would t ake a long time before industrial 
capacity utilization rates return to their pre-cris is levels, due to weak external demand 
outlook. Although employment conditions continue to  improve, unemployment rates 
remain at high levels. Therefore, it is expected th at inflation would be on a declining 
path in the forthcoming period, while core inflatio n indicators would remain consistent 
with the medium-term targets. 
In light of these assessments, the Committee has re iterated that it would be 
necessary to maintain the policy rate at current le vels for some time, and to keep it at 
low levels for a long period. 
Recent surge in capital inflows exacerbates the div ergence between the growth 
rates of domestic and external demand, widening the  current account deficit through 
rapid credit growth and increasing import demand an d thus highlighting the risks 
regarding financial stability. In order to encourag e the lengthening of the maturities in 
the Turkish lira money market transactions, the Com mittee has decided to allow 
overnight interest rates to diverge from the policy  rate temporarily, when needed. To this 
end, the Committee has decided to widen the gap bet ween lending and borrowing rates 
by reducing the borrowing rates by 400 basis points . Moreover, observing the favorable 
developments in credit conditions, the Committee ha s indicated that it would be 
appropriate to proceed with the remaining measures outlined in the exit strategy. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance . 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
eight working days.  