 
No: 2010 - 16 
18 May 2010 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: May 18, 2010 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
Absent: M. Đbrahim Turhan (on duty) 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has d ecided to keep overnight rates 
unchanged as follows, and to implement the technica l rate adjustment by setting the one week 
repo auction rate at 7 percent : 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 6.50  percent, lending rate at 9 percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing 
rate at 2.50 percent, lending rate at 12 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week matu rity borrowing facilities provided for 
primary dealers via repo transactions at 8 percent.  
 
Recent data suggest that the recovery in economic a ctivity is ongoing. Domestic 
demand is following a stable growth trend, while re cent developments indicate that uncertainties 
regarding external demand would last for a long per iod. Therefore, it would take a while before 
industrial capacity utilization rates return to pre -crisis levels. Although employment conditions 
continue to improve, unemployment rates remain at h igh levels. 
The Committee indicated that core inflation would c ontinue to remain at levels below the 
end-year target. It was also noted that unprocessed  food prices may display a significant fall in 
May. However, it was stated that the significant ga p between inflation expectations and the 
medium term targets necessitates close monitoring o f the pricing behavior. 
The Committee stated that market liquidity conditio ns have evolved as envisaged, and 
therefore, conditions are appropriate to implement the first step of the technical rate adjustment 
described in the “Monetary Policy Exit Strategy” pu blished on the 14 th  of April 2010. Observing 
that current rates for one week repo auctions fluct uate around 7 percent, the Committee 
decided to start conducting one week repo auctions via quantity auction with fixed interest rate, 
in order to eliminate such fluctuations. In this re spect, the one week repo rate, which becomes 
the new policy rate, is set at 7 percent—50 basis p oints above the overnight borrowing rates, as 
indicated in the exit strategy document. 
Considering the lingering uncertainties regarding g lobal economy, the Committee 
reiterated that it may be necessary to maintain pol icy rates at current levels for some time, and 
to keep them at low levels for a long period.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation related to the inflation outlook 
may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within eight 
working days.  