No: 2010 – 39  
                  29 November 2010   
  
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: November 11, 2010 
 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. In October, consumer prices were up 1.83 percent, w hile annual inflation was 
down 0.62 percentage points to 8.62 percent due to base effects. Although 
unprocessed food prices continued to soar dramatica lly, inflation remained 
broadly subdued across all other subcategories. Ann ual services inflation 
continued to decrease steadily, and core inflation indicators remained 
consistent with medium-term targets. 
2. Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages  increased by 1.75 
percentage points to 17.08 percent in October. Thus , food prices added 4.67 
percentage points to annual inflation. Having soare d in August and September 
on escalating vegetable prices, unprocessed food pr ices continued to rise 
sharply in October. Specifically, tomato prices inc reased sharply by 112 
percent due to the supply shortage during the shift  from field crops to 
greenhouse crops, driving inflation up by 0.85 perc entage points in October. 
Meanwhile, unprocessed red meat prices continued to  rise, albeit more slowly. 
Accordingly, annual unprocessed food inflation clim bed to an all-time high of 
31.28 percent.  
3. Bread and grains prices in the processed food group  have recently been 
affected by higher wheat prices. Moreover, prices f or other processed food 
products, especially processed meat products, have increased rapidly over the 
past two months. The cumulative increase in both re d meat and wheat prices 
continues to put cost pressure on processed food pr ices.  
4. Inflation in core goods and services remains contai ned. Although rising food 
prices continues to weigh on catering services, pri ces for services other than 
catering and transport remain flat for the third co nsecutive month. The base 
effects from the 2009 tax incentives on durable goo ds faded out in October. 
Thus, the annual rate of increase in prices of core  goods (goods excluding 
food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold ) slowed to a record 1.25 
percent. As a result, annual inflation captured by core price measures declined 
to around 2.5 to 3 percent year-on-year. 5. Against this backdrop, the Committee expects the an nual change of 
unprocessed food prices to fall significantly in co ming months. At the same 
time, inflation is expected to decrease markedly as  the influence of tobacco 
price base effects diminishes during the beginning of 2011. Core inflation 
might rise modestly in the forthcoming period, but is expected to remain 
around levels consistent with the medium-term targe ts. 
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. Recent data releases suggest that economic activity  continues to recover with 
the support of domestic demand. Industrial producti on grew by a seasonally 
adjusted 1.2 percent quarter-on-quarter in the thir d quarter, recording a more 
moderate recovery than in the first half of the yea r. Yet, in view of the rapid 
recovery in domestic demand leading indicators, the  Committee has stated 
that the economy is set to regain momentum in the l ast quarter.  
7. Confidence indices and new order indicators suggest  that domestic demand 
continues to recover. Three-month ahead expectation s for total new orders 
were more upbeat during September and October due t o strong domestic 
market conditions. Moreover, the Committee has note d that consumer 
confidence continues to improve, while investment a ppetite has grown further 
and stabilized at higher levels, and emphasized tha t domestic demand 
continues to grow at a faster pace than foreign dem and in the final quarter. 
8. Uncertainties regarding external demand persist. Ex ports remained subdued 
in October, while indicators for export orders show ed no sign of a strong 
recovery in the short term. Furthermore, there rema in downside risks to the 
pace of recovery in the global economy. Therefore, the Committee expects 
that it would take a long time before industrial ca pacity utilization rates return 
to their pre-crisis levels, due to the weak externa l demand outlook. 
9. Although employment conditions continue to improve,  unemployment rates 
remain at high levels. Non-farm employment growth p aused in the third 
quarter, owing to the slowdown in the services sect or. Committee members 
have noted that labor market developments are consi stent with the third-
quarter slowdown in production, and expect that emp loyment growth will 
resume in line with the end-year economic recovery.  Nevertheless, the 
Committee has reiterated that unemployment rates wo uld remain higher than 
pre-crisis levels for some time, containing unit la bor costs. 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
10. The Committee expects the weakening in the economic  activity and 
employment indicators in the third quarter to be te mporary. According to the Committee members, especially credit volume and dom estic demand follow a 
strong trend, nevertheless aggregate demand conditi ons do not exert upside 
pressures on inflation yet due to weak external dem and. Moreover, the 
Committee has indicated that 5 percentage points of  inflation, which was at 
8.62 percent as of October, can be attributed to th e direct effects of the 
unprocessed food and tobacco prices, which are both  expected to decelerate 
in the forthcoming period. Therefore, it is expecte d that inflation would be on a 
declining path in the forthcoming period, while cor e inflation indicators would 
remain consistent with the medium-term targets. In light of these assessments, 
the Committee has reiterated that it would be neces sary to maintain the policy 
rate at current levels for some time, and to keep i t at low levels for a long 
period.        
11. Although aggregate demand conditions support the st ance of keeping policy 
rates at low levels for a long period of time, the developments in the 
composition of the demand necessitates the active u se of other policy tools. 
The weakness in global economic outlook not only de lays the recovery in the 
external demand but also leads to further expansion ary policies across 
developed economies, which in turn fuels domestic d emand through the 
acceleration in capital inflows to emerging markets . The surge in capital 
inflows exacerbates the divergence between the grow th rates of domestic and 
external demand, widening the current account defic it through rapid credit 
growth and increasing import demand, thereby highli ghting the risks regarding 
financial stability. The Committee once again under scored that, to limit such 
risks, other policy instruments such as reserve req uirement ratios and liquidity 
management facilities may be used more effectively as macroprudential tools.    
12. In order to encourage the lengthening of the maturi ties in Turkish lira money 
market transactions, the Committee has decided to a llow overnight interest 
rates to diverge from the policy rate temporarily, when needed. To this end, 
the Committee has decided to widen the gap between lending and borrowing 
rates by reducing the borrowing rates by 400 basis points. Moreover, 
observing the favorable developments in credit cond itions, the Committee has 
indicated that it would be appropriate to proceed w ith the remaining measures 
outlined in the exit strategy. 
13. Commodity prices continue to pose risks regarding t he inflation outlook. The 
Committee members have highlighted the sharp increa ses in agricultural 
commodity prices such as cotton and wheat. The exis ting output gap and the 
strength of the Turkish lira have been limiting the  pass-through from 
agricultural commodity prices to the prices of core  goods and services. 
However, the Committee stated that the impact of th e commodity prices on the 
general price setting behavior should be closely mo nitored. 14. The CBT continues to monitor fiscal policy developm ents closely while 
formulating monetary policy. Increasing government savings—and therefore 
maintaining fiscal discipline—under the present cir cumstances is essential to 
control the current account deficit driven by the d isparity between domestic 
and external demand. The Committee members see the Medium Term 
Program (MTP) as an important step toward this dire ction. Accordingly, 
inflation forecasts presented in the latest inflati on report take the projections of 
the fiscal variables in the MTP as given, which env isages that, after a 
temporary acceleration in the final quarter of the year, the ratio of government 
expenditures to GDP would decline gradually startin g from 2011. The 
Committee stated that, should the fiscal stance dev iate significantly from this 
framework and consequently have an adverse effect o n the inflation outlook, a 
revision in the monetary policy stance may be consi dered. 
15. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price sta bility in the period ahead. 
Strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline a nd the structural reform 
agenda would support the improvement of Turkey’s so vereign risk, and thus 
facilitate macroeconomic and price stability. In th is respect, timely 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the MTP and the 
European Union accession process remains to be of u tmost importance. 
  