 
No: 2010 – 06 
26 February 2010 
 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: February 16, 2010 
  Inflation Developments  
1. Consumer prices increased by 1.85 percent in Jan uary, driving annual inflation 
up by 1.66 percentage points to 8.19 percent. As em phasized in the January 
Monetary Policy Committee (Committee) Meeting Summa ry, the recent rise in 
annual inflation was primarily due to the administe red price and tax 
adjustments, which added around 1.7 percentage poin ts to CPI inflation in 
January, and will add another 0.2 percentage points  in February. Therefore, 
the total impact is estimated to reach around 1.9 p ercentage points. After the 
tax adjustments are accounted for, underlying infla tion continues to hover at 
low levels. 
2. In January, unprocessed food prices picked up at  a slower pace than the 
seasonal norm. Yet, the red meat prices continued t o rise, having an indirect 
impact on processed food and catering prices and le ading to higher annual 
inflation in these subcategories. Moreover, the ris e in vegetable prices driven 
by heavy rainfall and floods may produce a signific ant but temporary upsurge 
in the annual unprocessed food inflation in Februar y.  
3. Energy prices were up 3.94 percent in January ow ing to adjustments in 
Special Consumption Tax and administered prices. Th us, the annual rate of 
increase in energy prices rose to 8.13 percent. Ann ual energy inflation is likely 
to increase further in coming months due to base ef fects. 
4. The annual rate of increase in prices of goods e xcluding energy and food 
accelerated in February with the 22 percent increas e in tobacco prices; but 
excluding tobacco, it slowed down from a month earl ier. 
5. The annual rate of increase in services prices r ose moderately, largely owing 
to changes in costs rather than demand-side factors . In fact, seasonally 
adjusted data show that the monthly rate of increas e in the prices of services, 
excluding transport and catering, remained modest. 
6. The Committee indicated that, due to tax adjustm ents, unprocessed food price 
increases and base effects, annual inflation would continue to rise markedly in 
February and hover above the target for some time. Aggregate demand slumped with the deepening of the global recession during the first quarter of 
2009 causing the rate of change in core price indic es to decline to historic 
lows. Therefore, core inflation indicators would al so increase slightly until mid-
year owing to base effects, yet remain below the ta rget throughout the year.  
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
7. Recent data releases suggest that a moderate rec overy in economic activity is 
ongoing. Industrial production grew by a robust 25. 2 percent year-on-year in 
December, which seemingly points to a vigorous reco very. However, as noted 
earlier by the Committee, the rapid growth of produ ction was largely driven by 
calendar effects and the low December 2009 base. Mo nthly and quarterly 
growth rates of seasonally adjusted industrial prod uction figures suggest that 
the economic activity continues to expand, yet the pace of recovery is 
moderate. Moreover, the capacity utilization for Ja nuary 2010 does not point to 
an acceleration in manufacturing activity. 
8. Domestic demand displays a gradual growth trend.  Production and imports 
data indicate that private consumption demand incre ased quarter-on-quarter 
during the fourth quarter but remained at low level s. Given the partial recovery 
in the labor market and expansionary monetary polic y, private consumption 
demand may continue to rise gradually. In fact, the  recent increase in total 
wage compensation and credit utilization supports p rivate consumption 
demand. 
9. Production and imports data for capital goods su ggest that the recovery in 
private investment demand continued into the final quarter. Investments are 
likely to grow further in the upcoming period, but aggregate demand 
uncertainty may continue to restrain resource utili zation and new investments. 
Therefore, investment demand is likely to remain be low pre-crisis levels for a 
long period. 
10. Uncertainty regarding foreign demand remains. T he Committee noted that the 
pace of recovery in real exports (excluding gold) i s far below the pre-crisis 
level. Leading indicators suggest that the slow pac e continued into January. 
While access to new markets may continue to support  exports, the Committee 
emphasized that the growth outlook for existing exp ort markets, particularly 
the euro area, remains relatively weaker, and thus the recovery in exports are 
likely to remain gradual. Taken together, this view  regarding aggregate 
demand seems to imply that it will take a while bef ore capacity utilization rates 
return to pre-crisis levels. 
11. Although there has been a mild improvement in e mployment conditions, 
unemployment rates remain at high levels. With the modest rebound in production, employment grew by 3.5 percent year-on- year in November 2009, 
while non-farm employment increased by 2 percent. S easonally adjusted data 
indicate that the recovery in non-farm employment s pread across all 
industries. Employment continues to grow steadily i n construction and 
services, but still lags behind pre-crisis levels i n the industrial sector. 
Committee members noted that industrial employment is unlikely to improve 
significantly unless there is a durable recovery in  foreign demand. 
12. In sum, fourth-quarter data suggests that the e conomic recovery is ongoing. 
The Committee reiterated that the medium-term trend  of aggregate demand 
would largely depend on the global growth outlook. Based on the assumption 
that the economy would recover gradually, resource utilization is expected to 
remain at low levels for some time and continue to support disinflation. In this 
respect, the Committee emphasized that inflation wo uld display a declining 
trend once the temporary factors, such as unprocess ed food price volatility 
and tax hikes, taper off. 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
13. The Committee noted that credit markets have co ntinued to improve due to 
lagged effects of the monetary easing. The tightnes s in credit conditions have 
been moderating since the publication of the July I nflation Report. Easing 
financial conditions and declining loan rates have been strengthening the 
expansionary impact of monetary policy. However, li ngering problems across 
the global economy are not resolved completely and there are still 
uncertainties regarding the strength of the recover y. Accordingly, the 
Committee has reemphasized that it would be necessa ry to keep policy rates 
at low levels for a long period of time. 
14. The Committee noted that as predicted in the Ja nuary Inflation Report, 
inflation would display sharp increases during the first two months of the year 
because of tax adjustments and base effects. Moreov er, it was emphasized 
that there would be an additional temporary impact in February coming from a 
further jump in vegetable prices caused by heavy ra infall and floods. 
Therefore, inflation is expected to exceed the leve ls envisaged for February; 
however, as vegetable prices normalize during March , inflation would revert 
back to the levels consistent with the January Infl ation Report forecast, At the 
same time, noting that the underlying trend implied  by core inflation indicators 
would remain at levels consistent with medium-term targets, the Committee 
emphasized that, given the low levels of resource u tilization, the precarious 
state of labor markets, and global economic conditi ons, general pricing 
behavior would not be adversely affected by the tem porary rise in inflation, 
and therefore, inflation would display a declining trend once the transitory 
effects taper off. However, it should be underscore d that the Committee will 
not hesitate to tighten the stance of monetary poli cy sooner than envisioned under the baseline scenario of the Inflation Report , should any unforeseen 
developments lead to a deterioration in general pri ce setting behavior. 
15. Both upside and downside risks to global econom ic activity remain. Rising 
budget deficits and ongoing problems in credit and real estate markets 
continue to pose downside risks for global activity , especially for developed 
economies. Although the probability of a disruption  in the recovery of global 
economic activity has been decreasing, it is still an important source of 
downside risk on domestic economic activity and inf lation. On the other hand, 
upside risks have also been emerging since the seco nd half of 2009, given the 
pace of global recovery over this period. The Commi ttee will closely monitor 
global developments and their impact on domestic in flation, and will take the 
necessary measures to keep inflation in line with t he medium term targets. 
16. Increasing budget deficits on a worldwide scale , especially in developed 
economies, continue to pose risks on inflation expe ctations and thus on 
longer-term global interest rates. In fact, recentl y, long term interest rates in 
the US economy have been displaying significant inc reases. Countries with 
relatively sounder banking systems and prudent fisc al policies would be more 
resilient against these risks. In this respect, the  Committee will continue to 
monitor fiscal policy developments closely while fo rmulating monetary policy. 
Should the goals set out in the Medium Term Program  be implemented 
through institutional and structural improvements, rather than tax and 
administered price hikes, it would be possible to k eep policy rates at single 
digit levels throughout the forecast horizon. 
17. The Committee Members continue to view the cour se of oil and other 
commodity prices as an important risk factor. Ample  liquidity driven by 
countercyclical policies on a global scale facilita tes speculative movements for 
commodity prices. Fast growth trends in countries l ike China and India, and 
the rising share of these economies in global commo dity demand, create 
further pressures on oil and other commodity prices . At this point it is worth 
noting that weak domestic demand conditions would l imit the pass-through 
stemming from upside cost-push shocks. Therefore, t he Committee will not 
react to the first round effects of short-term vola tility in commodity prices, 
especially when the resource utilization remains at  depressed levels. 
However, if an uptrend in commodity prices reflects  a strong and durable 
rebound in global economic activity that would in t urn have adverse effects on 
inflation expectations, then the monetary policy wi ll be tightened appropriately 
to keep inflation in line with medium-term inflatio n targets. 
18. Since the last quarter of 2008, the CBT, withou t prejudice to its primary 
objective of price stability, has focused on contai ning the adverse effects of the 
global crisis on the domestic economy, and this tas k has been achieved to a large extent. Monetary policy will continue to focu s on price stability in the 
period ahead. Strengthening the commitment to fisca l discipline and the 
structural reform agenda would support the improvem ent of Turkey’s 
sovereign risk, and thus facilitate macroeconomic a nd price stability. In this 
respect, timely implementation of the structural re forms envisaged by the 
Medium Term Program and the European Union accessio n process remains 
to be of utmost importance. 