No: 2010 – 05 
16 February 2010 
 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: February 16, 2010 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
Absent:  M. İbrahim Turhan (on sick leave) 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has d ecided to keep policy 
rates unchanged as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 6.50  percent, lending rate at 9 
percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate at 2.50 percent, lending rate at 12 percent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week matu rity borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions at 8 percent. 
 
Recent data releases suggest that a moderate recove ry in economic activity is 
ongoing. Domestic demand displays a gradual growth trend while there are still 
uncertainties regarding the external demand, sugges ting that it will take a while before 
the capacity utilization rates return to pre-crisis  levels. Although there has been a mild 
improvement in employment conditions, unemployment rates remain at high levels. 
Therefore, resource utilization is expected to stay  at low levels for some time. 
The Committee has indicated that, due to impact of tax adjustments, 
unprocessed food price increases, and base effects,  inflation would continue to rise 
significantly in February and hover above the targe t for some time. Core inflation 
indicators would also increase until mid-year, yet remain below the target throughout the 
year. In this respect, it has been emphasized that inflation would display a declining 
trend once the temporary factors taper off. 
Credit markets have continued to improve in respons e to the monetary easing. 
However, lingering problems across the global econo my are not resolved completely 
and there are still uncertainties regarding the str ength of the recovery. Accordingly, the 
Committee has reemphasized that it would be necessa ry to keep policy rates at low 
levels for a long period of time. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance . 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
eight working days.  