 
No: 2010 – 26 
19 August 2010 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: August 19, 2010 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç,  
M. Đbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to keep one-week 
repo auction rate (the policy rate) and overnight r ates unchanged as follows: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 7 percen t,   
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 6.50  percent, lending rate at 9 
percent, 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate at 2.50 percent, lending rate at 12 percent, 
d) The interest rate on overnight and one-week matu rity borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions at 8 percent. 
 
Recent data releases are in line with the outlook p resented in the July Inflation 
Report. There are signs of a partial slowdown in th e external demand, while domestic 
demand displays a relatively stable outlook. Theref ore, it would take a while before 
industrial capacity utilization rates return to the ir pre-crisis levels. Although employment 
conditions continue to improve, unemployment rates remain at high levels. Moreover, 
risks regarding the global economy remain significa nt. 
The Committee has restated that inflation would inc rease temporarily in the short 
term before reverting to a declining path starting from the last quarter of the year. Core 
inflation indicators are expected to remain consist ent with the medium-term targets. 
In light of these developments, the Committee reite rated that it would be 
necessary to maintain policy rates at current level s for some time, and to keep them at 
low levels for a long period. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance . 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
eight working days.  