No: 2010 – 27 
31 August 2010 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: August 19, 2010 
 
 
  Inflation Developments  
1. Consumer prices decreased by 0.48 percent in Jul y and annual inflation 
declined by 0.79 percentage points to 7.58 percent.  The fall in annual inflation 
was largely due to the base effects from the tax hi kes on tobacco and durable 
goods a year ago, as noted in the July summary of t he Monetary Policy 
Committee (the Committee) Meeting. Annual services and core goods inflation 
continued to moderate and core inflation indicators  remained in line with 
medium-term targets. 
2. Unprocessed food prices continued to fall in Jul y, albeit at a slower pace than 
in the past two months, and annual food inflation d eclined to 5.52  percent. The 
changes in food prices were mainly attributable to the seasonal drop in 
vegetable prices, while meat prices were back on th e rise after a two-month 
break. Accordingly, the contribution of meat prices  to annual inflation 
increased to 1.6 percentage points. Observations fo r August suggest that the 
annual rate of increase in unprocessed food prices may accelerate because of 
higher fruit prices. The lowering of customs duties  on imported livestock is 
expected to contain the unprocessed food inflation over the remainder of the 
year. 
3. Annual services inflation continues to trend dow nwards. In seasonally adjusted 
terms, inflation across all services categories  is  seen to be slowing down. The 
favorable developments in food and energy prices ea se the cost pressures on 
services prices. The annual rate of increase in ser vices prices, excluding the 
relatively more demand-sensitive catering and trans port services, dropped to 
3.46 percent, an all-time low since the inception o f the CPI. 
4. Energy prices remained flat in July. Fuel prices  remained broadly unchanged 
in line with international oil prices, while solid fuel prices continued to rise, 
albeit more slowly. The annual rate of increase in energy prices is expected to 
fall in coming months due to base effects. 
5. The year-on-year rate of increase in core goods (goods excluding food,  
energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) slow ed to 3.74 percent owing 
to the base effects from last year’s tax cuts on du rable  goods. Moreover, the tax-adjusted annual rate of increase in core goods prices remained unchanged 
at 2.4 percent. 
6. The Committee has noted that the recent increase  in international wheat and 
cotton prices would have implications for consumer prices, particularly for food 
prices and the clothing industry, respectively. In fact, annual inflation in 
clothing prices has been on an uptrend recently. On  the other hand, in view of 
domestic wheat production estimates and available d omestic stocks, the 
Committee expects that rising international wheat p rices would have a limited 
impact on inflation. 
7. On balance, the Committee has reiterated that in flation would increase 
temporarily in the short term before reverting back  to a declining path by the 
last quarter of the year. 
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
8. Recent data suggest that the recovery in economi c activity has slowed down. 
With the waning recovery, industrial production fel l by 2.1 percentage points 
month-on-month in June, which is the deepest monthl y contraction since April 
2009. The Committee has emphasized that the contrac tion has been more 
pronounced in manufacturing industries which are se nsitive to foreign 
demand. 
9. July’s survey indicators show an ongoing decline  in industrial orders 
expectations. Despite having increased month-on-mon th in July, capacity 
utilization rates continue to hover around low leve ls. Therefore, the Committee 
has concluded that the June drop in production is t emporary, but that 
downside risks regarding the pace of recovery remai n. 
10. Domestic demand displays a relatively stable ou tlook. Second-quarter data on 
production and imports indicate that private consum ption demand slowed 
quarter-on-quarter. The recent flattening of July’s  survey indicators and 
consumer confidence indices shows that there has no t been a surge in 
consumer spending as of the early part of the third  quarter. Yet, the 
Committee has noted that the May-July data largely reflect the effects of the 
euro area debt crisis, and therefore the slowdown i n domestic demand may be 
transitory. In fact, the steady increase in consume r loans during July shows 
that monetary conditions remain accommodative. 
11. Investment demand continues to recover, but rem ains below pre-crisis levels. 
The production of capital goods excluding vehicles and the imports of capital 
goods continue to grow. Production and imports data  suggest that private 
investments would increase significantly year-on-ye ar during the second quarter of 2010. Yet, the Committee has stated that  the recently increased 
uncertainty about the pace of recovery in foreign d emand might dampen new 
investments, particularly in the manufacturing indu stry. 
12. There are signs of a moderate slowdown in forei gn demand. The Committee, 
in its previous meeting, had emphasized the potenti al impacts of the adverse 
developments across key export destinations on econ omic activity. In fact, the 
export quantity index excluding gold declined marke dly in June following a rise 
for four consecutive months. Recent foreign trade d ata suggest that exports 
remained relatively weak in July and August. Moreov er, survey indicators of 
manufacturing industry do not indicate a significan t acceleration in export 
orders. Therefore, the Committee expects that it wo uld take a while before 
industrial capacity utilization rates return to the ir pre-crisis levels. 
13. Although employment conditions continue to impr ove, unemployment rates 
remain at elevated levels. Seasonally adjusted data  indicate that non-farm 
employment continued to recover in May, albeit more  slowly. The employment 
recovery was primarily driven by the industrial sec tor, while employment 
growth in services slowed down. The Committee has n oted that the weaker 
foreign demand conditions could dampen the labor ma rket and thus the 
recovery in domestic demand in coming months. In th is respect, the 
Committee has reiterated that the unemployment rate s would continue to 
remain at higher levels compared to pre-crisis peri od for sometime, containing 
the unit labor costs. 
 
  Monetary Policy and Risks 
14. The Committee has assessed that recent data rel eases are in line with the 
outlook presented in the July Inflation Report. Alt hough domestic demand has 
slowed down moderately since April owing to the pro blems in the euro area, it 
is expected that domestic demand would continue to display a relatively stable 
outlook bolstered by the supportive monetary condit ions. Recent credit 
surveys on the second quarter suggest that demand f or both consumer and 
commercial loans has continued to increase. Moreove r, ongoing deposit 
growth and improving conditions regarding banks’ ac cess to external credit are 
supportive for credit expansion. 
15. The Committee has restated that inflation would  increase temporarily in the 
near term before reverting to a declining path star ting from the last quarter of 
the year. Inflation is expected to display a signif icant rise in August due to 
sharp increases in fruit prices, but then trend dow nwards in the last quarter 
with the support of a reversal in last year’s food price base effects. Core inflation indicators are expected to remain consist ent with the medium-term 
targets. 
16. In light of these developments, the Committee r eiterated that it would be 
necessary to maintain policy rates at current level s for some time, and to keep 
them at low levels for a long period. 
17. Risks regarding the global economy remain. Data  releases on global 
economic activity have increased the uncertainties regarding the pace of the 
recovery. Ongoing problems in credit, real estate a nd labor markets across 
developed economies, with concerns regarding the su stainability of public debt 
decreasing the room for countercyclical policy are key factors underpinning the 
downside risks regarding global economic activity. The Committee members 
have stated that, should problems in the global eco nomy further intensify, 
thereby increasing the possibility of a domestic re cession, a new easing cycle 
may be considered. 
18. The Committee has assessed that conditions are appropriate to gradually 
implement the measures outlined in the exit strateg y as envisaged. However, 
there are risks that could necessitate bringing for ward or delaying the 
measures outlined in the exit strategy. Recently, s trengthening perceptions 
that developed economies will keep their policy rat es at low levels for a long 
period, together with ample liquidity conditions ha ve led to a surge in capital 
flows toward emerging markets. Given the relative i mprovement in the 
creditworthiness of Turkey during the post-crisis p eriod, it is possible that 
capital inflows may further increase in the forthco ming period. Such a 
development would exacerbate the divergence between  the pace of recovery 
in the domestic demand and external demand. If this  pattern of growth 
coexists with rapid credit expansion and a deterior ation in the current account 
balance, consequently leading to financial stabilit y concerns, it would be 
necessary to utilize other policy instruments such as reserve requirement 
ratios and liquidity tools more effectively. Accord ingly, the Committee may 
bring forward the measures outlined in the exit str ategy that were envisaged to 
be implemented by end-2010. By contrast, should the  uncertainties regarding 
global economy intensify and consequently dampen do mestic demand, these 
measures may be implemented at a later period. 
19. The Committee has indicated that recent volatil ity in commodity prices pose 
risks regarding short-term inflation forecasts. Alt hough ongoing uncertainties 
regarding the global economy continue to suppress e nergy and industrial 
metal prices, climate conditions are having an adve rse impact on agricultural 
commodities. In fact, recently, the prices of wheat  and cotton, which are 
important inputs for core consumer goods, have disp layed rapid increases. At 
this stage, the Committee does not view these devel opments as a threat toward attaining the medium-term targets, but ackno wledges the need to 
monitor commodity prices closely. 
20. The Central Bank monitors fiscal policy develop ments closely while 
formulating monetary policy. The Committee members have indicated that the 
delay in the enactment of the fiscal rule has incre ased the importance of 
current fiscal policy implementation. Budget realiz ations in the first half of 2010 
suggest that the better-than-expected performance i n budget revenues, due to 
stronger economic activity than envisaged in the Me dium Term Program 
(MTP), is largely being used to reduce government d ebt. Sustaining fiscal 
discipline in the period ahead as well is crucial, both in terms of providing more 
flexibility regarding the conduct of countercyclica l monetary policy, and also for 
keeping the market interest rates at low levels per manently. In this respect, the 
Committee will continue to monitor the fiscal devel opments and their impact on 
inflation outlook closely. Should fiscal discipline  be implemented through 
institutional and structural improvements, rather t han indirect tax hikes, it 
would be possible to keep policy rates at single-di git levels over the medium-
term. 
21. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price  stability in the period ahead. 
Strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline a nd the structural reform 
agenda would support the improvement of Turkey’s so vereign risk, and thus 
facilitate macroeconomic and price stability. In th is respect, timely 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the MTP and the 
European Union accession process remains to be of u tmost importance. 
 