No: 2010 – 08 
18 March 2010 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: March 18, 2010 
 
Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç 
M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (The Committee) has deci ded to keep policy 
rates unchanged as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 6.50 p ercent, lending rate at 9 
percent, 
b) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00  p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate at 2.50 percent, lending rate at 12 p ercent, 
c) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturit y borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions at 8  percent. 
 
Recent data releases suggest that a moderate recovery in economic activity is 
ongoing. Domestic demand displays a gradual growth tren d while there are still 
uncertainties regarding the external demand, suggesting  that it will take a while before 
the industry capacity utilization rates return to pre-cr isis levels. Although employment 
conditions continue to improve, unemployment rates rema in at high levels.  
The Committee has noted that inflation would drop to  single digits in March, yet 
hover significantly above the target for sometime. It would then revert back to a 
downward trend as the temporary factors taper off start ing with the last quarter of the 
year, and decline to levels consistent with inflation ta rgets by early 2011. Core inflation 
indicators would increase in the short term, especially in  March and April, due to 
temporary tax cuts of the previous year, but would rem ain at levels below the target. 
Credit markets have continued to improve in response to the monetary easing. 
However, despite recent improvements, lingering proble ms across the global economy 
are not resolved completely. Accordingly, the Committee  has reiterated that it would be 
necessary to keep policy rates at low levels for a long pe riod of time. However, the 
Central Bank will not hesitate to tighten monetary po licy sooner than envisaged in the 
baseline scenario of the Inflation Report, should the r ecent increase in inflation 
expectations lead to a deterioration in price setting b ehavior. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
eight working days.  