 1 No: 2010 - 12                               14 Apri l 2010 
 
 
PRESS RELEASE OF THE CENTRAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC O F TURKEY 
ON THE MONETARY POLICY EXIT STRATEGY 
 
1.  Recently, one of the most discussed issues in monet ary policies is “exit strategies”, 
which include withdrawing measures taken during the  global crisis and normalization 
operations of monetary policies. In fact, for some time the general public has also 
started to discuss the exit strategies that will be  carried out by the Central Bank of the 
Republic of Turkey (Central Bank). Due to the impor tance attached to transparency and 
predictability, the Central Bank has decided to inf orm the public about the general 
framework of its exit strategy before starting to i mplement it. 
2.  The global economy experienced the deepest crisis s ince the Great Depression in 1929. 
However, the very courageous, decisive and effectiv e measures taken by central banks 
in a coordinated way reduced the destructive effect s of the crisis and shortened the exit 
duration from the crisis. During the crisis, especi ally the central banks of developed 
countries provided extraordinary levels of liquidit y to the markets and all kind of 
monetary policy tools were used courageously, witho ut hesitation about risks of 
deterioration of their balance sheets. Due to the f inancial support programs 
implemented during the crisis period, government bu dget deficits also reached very 
high levels. However, implementing unusually loose monetary policies and 
expansionary fiscal policies for an extended period , on the one hand, may cause new 
potential economic imbalances, on the other hand in creases the risk of inflation, which 
might be very costly to control in the future.  
3.  Indeed, many central banks have been working on exi t strategies for a long time as the 
adverse effects of the crisis diminish and the sign als of economic recovery strengthen, 
and they have been preparing the markets for the no rmalization process. Of course, each 
central bank will form its own exit strategy accord ing to their country specific 
conditions, such as improvements in their financial  markets, economic recovery and 
inflationary pressure. Turkey, with both a very str ong and well-regulated banking 
system and a flexible and effective liquidity manag ement framework suitable for every 
condition, formed with the experience gained from s everal crises, was fairly well 
prepared for the global crisis period. These condit ions have reduced the need for the  2 Central Bank to take additional radical measures an d the structure of the Central Bank’s 
balance sheet was not damaged during the crisis per iod. Therefore, the Central Bank’s 
exit strategy from the crisis period will be more s imple and easier than that of other 
central banks’. 
4.  As the crisis began to deepen in October 2008, the Central Bank established a strong 
line of communication with the public about details  of the existing liquidity 
management strategy and its robust structure, and t he liquidity facilities to be provided 
were outlined step by step, in a clear and transpar ent way. Subsequently, the announced 
measures for both Turkish lira and foreign exchange  markets have gradually been 
introduced, and tensions and volatilities in the ma rkets have been reduced considerably.  
 
Measures and Exit Strategy for Foreign Exchange Mar kets 
 
5.  The Central Bank has taken the following measures r elated to the foreign exchange 
markets and the foreign exchange liquidity of the b anking system during the crisis: 
a.  Foreign exchange buying auctions were suspended sta rting from 16 October 
2008, providing the liquidity, which has been perma nently withdrawn from the 
foreign exchange market through foreign exchange bu ying auctions, to be kept 
in the system.  
b.  As unhealthy price formations were witnessed in the  foreign exchange market 
due to a decrease in the depth of the market, USD 1 00 million in total was sold 
to the market through foreign exchange selling auct ions on 24 October 2008 and 
27 October 2008.  
c.  In October 2008, the Central Bank resumed its inter mediary functions related to 
foreign exchange deposits and gradually increased t he transaction limits of 
banks in the Foreign Exchange Deposit Market to USD  10.8 billion. Moreover, 
the maturity of foreign exchange deposits borrowed within the predetermined 
borrowing limits by the banks from the Foreign Exch ange Deposit Markets was 
extended from 1 week to 1 month, and the borrowing rate for transactions where 
the Central Bank is a counterparty was reduced from  10.0 percent to 7.0 percent 
for US Dollar, and 9.0 percent for Euro. In Februar y 2009, the maturity of the 
foreign exchange deposits have been extended from a  maximum of 1 month to 3 
months and the foreign exchange deposit rate, for t ransactions in which the  3 Central Bank is a counterparty, was reduced to 5.5 percent for US Dollar and to 
6.5 percent for Euro. 
d.  On 5 December 2008, the FX required reserves ratio,  which was 11.0 percent, 
was reduced by 2.0 percentage points, providing the  banking system with an 
additional foreign currency liquidity amounting to approximately USD 2.5 
billion. In addition, with the new measures that ha ve been taken related to export 
rediscount credits, the limit for export rediscount  credits has been increased and 
the utilization of these credits has been eased.    
e.  As the depth of the foreign exchange market decreas ed and unhealthy price 
formations were witnessed, foreign exchange selling  auctions have been 
resumed as of 10 March 2009 to ensure smooth operat ion of the foreign 
exchange market through supporting foreign exchange  liquidity. 900 million US 
dollar was sold through foreign exchange selling au ctions. 
6.  With the diminishing effects of the global crisis, some of the measures related to the 
foreign exchange market have already been removed. The foreign exchange selling 
auctions were suspended on 2 April 2009, as concern s pertaining to the depth of the 
foreign exchange market have been eased with the ef fect of favorable developments in 
the global markets. The foreign exchange buying auc tions aimed at reserve 
accumulation, which were suspended during the crisi s period, were resumed as of 4 
August 2009 as the risk appetite regained strength with positive expectations related to 
the global economy and the foreign exchange market has become relatively stabilized. 
7.  A significant part of the foreign exchange liquidit y measures implemented during the 
crisis by the Central Bank are still in effect. Eve n though the foreign exchange liquidity 
of the banking system has been strong, the faciliti es provided by the Foreign Exchange 
Deposit Market within the Central Bank eased concer ns during the crisis period and 
also facilitated the foreign borrowing transactions  of the system, by providing an 
important safeguard to the banking system. The Cent ral Bank is the lender of last resort 
for Turkish lira and has broad flexibilities relate d to Turkish lira liquidity management, 
however the Central Bank is not naturally the lende r of last resort for other currencies. 
For this reason, the banking system has to be much more discreet and prudent in its 
management of foreign exchange liquidity. The facil ities provided by the Central Bank 
during the crisis should not result in complacency and the banking system should carry 
on with effective foreign exchange liquidity manage ment. Therefore, in the upcoming 
period, as normalization in the global markets beco mes significant, it is planned that  4 measures related to foreign exchange liquidity will  gradually be taken to pre-crisis 
levels, in an orderly manner. 
8.  Even the Central Bank’s exit strategy related to f oreign exchange liquidity may change 
as needs arise, it is foreseen to be as follows: 
a.  The FX required reserves ratio may gradually be inc reased in a measured pace. 
b.  Considering developments in global interest rates, foreign exchange deposit 
lending rates announced by the Central Bank may be increased. 
c.  After the effects of the developed countries’ exit strategies are monitored, the 
intermediary function of the Central Bank in the fo reign exchange deposit 
market will be abolished. However, banks will be ab le to borrow foreign 
exchange deposits from the Central Bank within the predetermined borrowing 
limits. The maturity of the foreign exchange deposi ts borrowed within the 
predetermined borrowing limits by banks from the Ce ntral Bank will be 
decreased from 3 months to 1 week. 
9.  On the other hand, even if no change is considered in the current circumstances, the 
limits and conditions for export rediscount credits , that are provided to exporters by the 
Central Bank through Eximbank, may be revised gradu ally in case the need for credits 
disappear and utilization decreases. 
 
Measures and Exit Strategy for Turkish Lira Markets  
 
10.  While evaluating the exit strategy for Turkish lira  operations, the nature and purpose of 
the Central Bank’s monetary measures, which have be en implemented since the 
deepening of the global crisis period, should be pr operly understood. Monetary 
measures implemented during crisis could be classif ied into three main groups: 
a.  The first pillar of monetary measures was the arran gements to eliminate the 
uncertainties in money markets caused by the crisis . Within this framework; 
i.  In October and November 2008, in order to reduce th e potential 
volatility in overnight interest rates, the corrido r of the Central Bank’s 
borrowing and lending interest rates was reduced fr om 3.5 points to 2.5 
points. 
ii.  After October 2008, to reduce the potential tension  in money markets 
and to eliminate the volatility in overnight intere st rates, the Central 
Bank started to inject more liquidity than needed. The excess liquidity  5 created within this context was sterilized by O/N o perations at the end of 
the day.  
b.  The second pillar of monetary measures was the arra ngements to support the 
credit markets by taking the permanent decrease in liquidity levels into account. 
Within this framework; 
i.  On 19 June 2009 in response to the increasing liqui dity shortage in the 
market and the possibility that the shortage may be come permanent, the 
Central Bank started 3-month repo auctions. 
ii.  As the permanence of the liquidity shortage in the market became more 
evident, on 16 October 2009, in order to support th e credit mechanism, 
the Turkish lira required reserve ratio was reduced  from 6 percent to 5 
percent. 
c.  The third and last pillar of the monetary measures is monetary policy decisions. 
After the crisis began to deepen, as it was predict ed that the inflation rate would 
decline dramatically, after November 2008 the Centr al Bank policy interest rates 
were sharply reduced and the Central Bank’s borrowi ng rate was cut from 16.75 
percent to 6.50 percent. 
11.  Also, independent of these measures, due to the tec hnical reasons announced at the 
release of the “Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy f or 2010”, dated 10 December 
2009, the Central Bank started to purchase governme nt securities from the secondary 
markets as of 23 December 2009. Although the outrig ht purchase of government 
securities coincides with the crisis period, it has  no direct relationship with the crisis. 
Hence, the outright purchase of government securiti es should be considered out of the 
scope of the exit strategy. In this respect, the ou tright purchase of government securities 
will continue in the framework of the previously an nounced program. 
12.  In the formulation of exit strategies, accurate und erstanding of the nature of the 
measures taken during the crisis is important. Some  of the measures regarding the 
Turkish lira markets aim to eliminate the temporary  risks of the crisis and others reflect 
the permanent changes emerged with the impact of th e crisis.  Overfunding of the 
markets is an application regarding direct crisis m anagement to prevent fluctuations in 
interest rates. Therefore, this issue takes priorit y within the context of exit strategy.  On 
the other hand, in the coming period it is foreseen  that, the liquidity shortage in the 
market will continue and the conditions for technic al interest rate adjustment mentioned  6 in the release of the “Monetary and Exchange Rate P olicy for 2010” dated 10 December 
2009, will arise. 
13.  Considering the allocation of liquidity within the system in order to prepare the banking 
sector for technical rate adjustment, in order to r educe possible fluctuations in the 
money markets and to maintain liquidity management flexibility against unforeseen 
liquidity developments, the Central Bank decided to  keep the integrity of both reducing 
overfunding in the context of the exit strategy and  technical interest rate adjustment 
operations and to adopt a gradual strategy.    
14.  In the first stage, the amount of liquidity that ha s been provided as a part of the 
overfunding policy will be reduced gradually (Graph  1). In this process, the Central 
Bank will begin to determine the amount of funding via repo auctions in such a way 
that, at the end of the day there will remain less excess liquidity, so the amount 
withdrawn in Repo and Reverse Repo Market of ISE an d Interbank Money Market 
within the Central Bank will lessen.  In this perio d: 
a.  As in the current situation, it will be paid attent ion on to keep the overnight 
interest rates about the announced borrowing rate. 
b.  The overnight borrowing rate announced by the Centr al Bank will continue to 
be the reference rate of the monetary policy. 
c.  The gradual decline in overfunding may cause quite a limited rise in weekly 
repo auction interest rates.   
Graph 1: Illustration – Liquidity Shortage and Cent ral Bank Operations in Exit 
Process 
 Repo Funding: New Projection  OMO STERILIZATION: New Projection  Funding (within current policy)  
Sterilization (within current policy)  Net OMO  CURRENT 
SITUATION  FIRST 
STAGE  FIRST STEP  SECOND STEP  TECHNICAL INTEREST ADJUSTMENT PROCESS  
15th of April   7  
15.  In case liquidity shortage evolves in line with ex pectations, in the second stage, the 
technical interest rate adjustment process will bec ome operative. As stated in article 62 
of the Central Bank’s announcement published on 10  December 2009 (Monetary Policy 
and Exchange Rate Policy For 2010);  
“…In such a case, (as a permanent liquidity shortag e emerges) the Central Bank, 
after considering the distribution of liquidity wit hin the system, may opt for the one-
week maturity repo auction rate to be the monetary policy reference interest rate and 
to adjust the overnight lending and borrowing inter est rates downward in order to 
facilitate this. As elaborated below, a technical i nterest rate cut will merely imply a 
technical arrangement to facilitate a change in ope rational structure due to the 
permanent change in liquidity conditions where shor t-term interest rates are 
maintained at current level. Thus it shall not in a ny way imply the easing of 
monetary policy.” 
In article 68 of the same announcement, it is speci fied that; 
“…The Central Bank will also continue its practices  to enhance the effectiveness   
of monetary policy and liquidity management in 2010 . Accordingly, the Central 
Bank may change not only its liquidity management s trategy, but also the overnight 
borrowing and lending interest rate margins when ne cessary.” 
In this respect, the change in the operational stru cture of liquidity management will not 
be in the form of a one time interest rate cut as m entioned in the announcement 
published on 10 December 2009. However, in order to  maintain the flexibility of 
liquidity management against unexpected liquidity d evelopments and not to create 
volatility in money markets, it is planned to be ca rried out in two steps.  
16. Thus;  
a.  In the first step (Graph 2); 
i.  The Central Bank’s borrowing and lending interest r ates for overnight 
transactions will not be changed. However, the one- week repo auction 
procedure will be subject to change by implementing  amount auction 
procedure via fixed interest rate instead of the tr aditional auction 
procedure. 
ii.  In this step, the fixed interest rate for one-week repo auctions will be 
determined by adding 50 basis points to the declare d overnight borrowing 
interest rate of the Central Bank. Therefore, the f ixed interest rate for one- 8 week repo transactions will become the reference (p olicy) interest rate of 
the monetary policy. 
iii.  For example, if the Central Bank’s overnight borrow ing interest rate is 6.5 
percent and the lending interest rate is 9.0 percen t on the date of this 
arrangement, while the Central Bank’s overnight bor rowing and lending 
rates will be kept at 6.5 and 9.0 percent respectiv ely, the interest rate of 
one-week repo auctions will be determined as 7.0 pe rcent, founded by 
adding 50 basis points to the overnight borrowing i nterest rate. 
iv.  Starting to use the one-week repo auction interest rate rather than the 
overnight borrowing interest rate, as the policy in terest rate will not mean 
a change in monetary policy stance. Indeed, the one -week repo auction 
interest rates are already being formed above the a nnounced borrowing 
rate for overnight transactions. 
v.  In this transition period, although in a relatively  decreasing amount, the 
excess funding policy to the market will continue. While determining the 
funding amount through repo auctions, it will be co nsidered that the 
overnight interest rates to be formed generally abo ut the declared 
borrowing interest rate. In occasional cases of vol atility, it will be paid 
attention that the overnight rates do not exceed th e one week repo auction 
rate evidently. 
 
Graph 2: Illustration – First Step of Technical Int erest Rate Adjustment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 CBRT Lending Rate 
10:00 16:00 17:00 CBRT Borrowing Rate 
OMO Late Liquidity Window (LON) 11:00 PD Lending Rate 
250 bp 
50 bp 100 bp 100 bp LON Lending Rate 
LON Borrowing Rate Secondary Market Interest Rate CBRT POLICY RATE 
One Week Repo Rate 500 bp 
450 bp  9  
b.  As the liquidity shortage increases in line with ex pectations, the second step of 
the technical interest rate adjustment process will  become operational. In the 
second step (Graphics 3); 
i.  The difference between the one-week repo auction in terest rate and the 
overnight borrowing interest rate may be increased.  The secondary market 
average overnight interest rate will be targeted to  be formed around the 
one week repo auction rate. 
ii.  The difference between the one-week repo auction in terest rate and the 
overnight borrowing interest rate may be increased;  either by raising the 
one-week repo auction interest rate if the Monetary  Policy Committee 
(Committee) decides that monetary tightening is req uired, or by lowering 
the overnight borrowing and lending interest rates if the Committee 
decides not to make any change in the policy intere st rate. 
iii.  In this term, the differences between the one-week repo auction interest 
rate and the overnight borrowing and lending intere st rates may not always 
be symmetrical. The Committee will determine the di fference between the 
borrowing and lending rates, and the difference bet ween the said rates and 
the one-week repo auction rate as an element of the  operational framework 
of monetary policy. 
 
Graph 3: Illustration – Second Step of Technical In terest Rate Adjustment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 CBRT Lending Rate 
10:00 16:00 17:00 CBRT Borrowing Rate 
OMO LateLiquidity Window (LON) 11:00 PD LendingRate 
250 bp 
75 bp 75 bp 100 bp LON LendingRate 
LON BorrowingRate SecondaryMarket Interest Rate CBRT POLICY RATE 
One Week Repo Rate  10   
17.  Of the measures taken since the last quarter of 200 8 such as the initiation of 3 month 
repo auctions and the reduction of the Turkish lira  required reserves ratio aimed to 
support effective functioning of the credit mechani sm. During the global crisis, all 
around the world capital flows slowed down due to w eakening capital flows, thus a 
permanent liquidity shortage emerged in our country . As long as the liquidity shortage 
continues at high levels, although the amount may c hange depending on the liquidity 
level, three-month repo auctions will continue to b e a regular funding instrument. 
However, as no change is foreseen currently, if the  liquidity shortage decreases 
noticeably and/or credit conditions ease, the Turki sh lira required reserve ratios may be 
increased as well. 
18.  Although the rapid interest rate cut decisions take n by the Central Bank aimed partly to 
eliminate the negative effects of the global crisis  on the corporate sector and the 
tightening in monetary conditions, the decisions ar e fundamentally shaped by the 
inflation outlook and the decline in the risk premi um of Turkey. In other words, the 
policy interest rate cuts reflect the adaptation pr ocess for interest rates to levels that are 
compatible with price stability. In the coming peri od, the short-term interest rates will 
be determined with a view to harmonizing the inflat ion outlook with the medium term 
inflation targets.  
19.  The main policy instrument of the Central Bank is t he short-term interest rates. 
However, one of the lessons learned during the cris is is that other monetary policy 
instruments may be required to reduce the macroecon omic risks, especially when the 
economy is overheated. In this context, depending o n future developments, – for 
example if the credit expansion speed exceeds desir ed levels – the required reserve 
ratios may be used more actively as a policy tool t o reduce the macroeconomic risks.  
20.  As a result, some of the measures taken in the fore ign exchange and Turkish lira 
markets during the crisis are planned to be withdra wn gradually. In this context, 
primarily the measures taken in direct crisis manag ement will be withdrawn, and as in 
the rest of the world, in our country the exit stra tegy will be a cautious and gradual 
process that safeguards financial stability.   
21.   On the other hand, the release of the “Monetary an d Exchange Rate Policy for 2010” 
dated 10 December 2009, continues to be the main po licy document regarding exchange 
rate policy and liquidity management issues.  Hence forth, regarding issues that are not  11  clarified in this release, the statements in the re lease dated 10 December 2009 will 
continue to be valid. 
 