 
No: 2010 – 35 
26 October 2010 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: October 14, 2010 
 
 
  Inflation Developments  
1. Consumer prices picked up by 1.23 percent in Sep tember and annual inflation 
rose by 0.91 percentage points to 9.24 percent. The  rise in annual inflation 
was due to the sharp increase in unprocessed food p rices. Inflation was 
generally moderate across all other subcategories. While annual services 
inflation continued to decrease steadily, core infl ation indicators remained in 
line with medium-term targets.  
2. Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic bevera ges increased by 4.96 
percentage points to 15.33 percent in September due  to continued upswings 
in unprocessed food prices. As noted in the Septemb er summary of the 
Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) meeting, the steep rise in 
vegetable prices pushed food and nonalcoholic bever ages prices higher. 
Moreover, unprocessed meat prices continued to incr ease in September. 
Thus, annual unprocessed food inflation increased b y 20.89 percent over two 
months, bringing annual inflation in this subgroup to an all-time high of 28.74 
percent. Meanwhile, processed food inflation remain ed subdued despite 
higher processed meat prices. However, the recent i ncrease in domestic 
wheat prices driven by rising global wheat prices c ontinues to put upward 
pressure on processed food prices.  
3. Energy prices rose slightly in September, while annual energy inflation 
continued to decline. Inflation in core goods and s ervices remained broadly 
contained. The annual rate of increase in the price s of services excluding 
catering and transport, which are relatively more d emand-sensitive, dropped to 
an all-time low of 1.85 percent. Similarly, the ann ual rate of increase in core 
goods (goods excluding food, energy, alcoholic beve rages, tobacco and gold) 
prices continued to fall. Moreover, recent figures on seasonally adjusted 
inflation data indicate that underlying inflation r emains in line with medium-
term targets. The base effects from the temporary 2 009 tax incentives on 
durable goods would serve to bring annual inflation  down in October.  
4. Against this backdrop, the Committee has reitera ted that inflation would be on 
a declining path in the forthcoming period.  
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
5. Recent data releases suggest that the economy co ntinues to recover. 
Industrial production grew by a seasonally adjusted  2.7 percent month-on-
month in August and by 1.0 percent compared to the previous quarter during 
July-August. Taking into account the July-August de velopments as well as the 
September and the fourth quarter leading indicators , industrial production 
growth is expected to slow in the third quarter, bu t then accelerate in the fourth 
quarter. However, the Committee has noted that, des pite posting quarterly 
gains since the second quarter of 2009, industrial production is still running 
below pre-crisis levels. 
6. Domestic demand displays a relatively stronger o utlook. Both the July-August 
data on the production and imports of consumer good s and the September 
survey indicators show that private consumption dem and continued to recover 
steadily during the third quarter. Moreover, the im provement in consumer 
confidence indicates that private consumption deman d would remain robust in 
the final quarter. In addition, investments are exp ected to recover further in the 
third quarter and grow markedly year-on-year. In fa ct, indices for the 
production and imports of investment goods increase d during July-August 
compared to the previous quarter, while firms’ inve stment expectations 
continued to improve steadily over these two months  and rose sharply in 
September. Yet, the Committee has stated that the u ncertainty about foreign 
demand might dampen investment growth, particularly  in the manufacturing 
industry. 
7. Uncertainty regarding foreign demand remains ele vated. After falling in June 
and July, the export quantity index excluding gold moved up in August yet 
remained below its level in May. According to recen t foreign trade data, 
exports grew slightly in September and October, wit h new manufacturing 
orders following a similar pattern. Amid weak forei gn demand underpinned by 
signs of slowing global trade and projections of a slowdown in the pace of the 
global recovery, the Committee reiterated that it w ould take a while before 
industrial capacity utilization rates return to pre -crisis levels. 
8. Although employment conditions continue to impro ve, unemployment rates still 
remain elevated. Industrial employment continued to  recover in June, whereas 
services employment dropped slightly in seasonally adjusted terms. Third-
quarter leading indicators suggest that the halt in  non-farm employment 
growth is temporary and employment would continue t o rise gradually. 
Nevertheless, the Committee has reiterated that the  unemployment rates 
would remain higher than pre-crisis levels for some  time, containing unit labor 
costs.   Risks and Monetary Policy  
9. The Committee has assessed the inflation forecas ts and the economic outlook 
to be presented in the Inflation Report. In line wi th the developments outlined 
above, inflation forecasts were based on an outlook  which envisages that 
domestic demand is stronger compared to the previou s period, external 
demand continues to restrain economic activity, and  thus aggregate demand 
conditions continue to support disinflation, albeit  to a lesser degree. Therefore, 
it is expected that inflation would be on a declini ng path in the forthcoming 
period, while core inflation would remain consisten t with the medium-term 
targets.      
10. In light of these assessments, the Committee ha s reiterated that it would be 
necessary to maintain policy rates at current level s for some time, and to keep 
them at low levels for a long period. On the other hand, in order to enhance 
the efficient functioning of the Turkish lira marke t, the Committee has decided 
to reduce the borrowing rates by 50 basis points. 
11. Developments regarding global economic activity  would continue to be the 
main factor driving inflation dynamics and the mone tary policy outlook. 
Recently, leading indicators of economic activity c ontinue to slow down, 
underscoring downside risks especially regarding th e US economy. 
Furthermore, ongoing problems in credit, real estat e, and labor markets across 
developed economies and the uncertainties regarding  the impact of fiscal 
consolidations suggest that the downside risks rega rding the pace of global 
growth are likely to persist for some time. The Com mittee stated that, should 
the global economy face a longer-than-anticipated p eriod of anemic growth, 
the monetary tightening envisaged during the final quarter of 2011 under the 
baseline scenario of the October Inflation Report m ay be postponed. 
Moreover, it was indicated that an outcome whereby global economic 
problems intensify and contribute to a contraction of domestic economic 
activity, may trigger a new easing cycle. By contra st, it was underscored that 
monetary tightening may be implemented in an earlie r period, should the 
recovery in economic activity turn out to be faster  than expected. 
12. Expectations of more accommodative monetary pol icies in developed 
economies have been leading to a surge in capital f lows toward emerging 
markets. This development, coupled with the relativ e improvement in the 
creditworthiness of Turkey, exacerbates the risks r elated to the divergence 
between the domestic and external demand. While not  yet a significant 
concern regarding financial stability, the Committe e has indicated that these 
developments support the implementation of the “exi t strategy” measures. 
Therefore, the Committee has indicated that it woul d be appropriate to 
proceed with the remaining measures outlined in the  exit strategy that were envisaged to be implemented by the end of 2010. Mor eover, the Committee 
has judged that the 3-month repo funding is no long er needed. 
13. Should the capital inflows continue, the diverg ence in the growth rates 
between domestic and external demand is likely to i ntensify in the forthcoming 
period. Additional policy instruments, other than t he short-term policy rates, 
would be needed to curb risks emanating from this c hannel. In this respect, 
the Committee stated that, should the disparity bet ween domestic demand and 
external demand continue, it would be necessary to utilize other policy 
instruments such as reserve requirement ratios and liquidity management 
facilities more effectively, to address financial s tability concerns including rapid 
credit expansion and a deterioration in the current  account balance. 
14. Food and commodity price inflation has accelera ted recently. The existing 
output gap and the strength of the Turkish lira has  been limiting the pass-
through from food and commodity prices to the price s of core goods and 
services. However, potential second-round effects c ontinue to be a risk, if the 
increases in food and commodity prices persist. The  Committee indicated that, 
should such a risk materialize and lead to a deteri oration in the price setting 
behavior which in turn hampers the attainment of me dium-term inflation 
targets, an earlier-than-envisaged tightening in th e baseline scenario would be 
considered. 
15. The CBT continues to monitor fiscal policy deve lopments closely while 
formulating monetary policy. Increasing government saving under the present 
circumstances is essential to control the current a ccount deficit driven by the 
disparity between domestic and external demand. The  Medium Term Program 
(MTP) is seen as an important step toward this dire ction. Accordingly, our 
revised forecasts take the projections of the gover nment expenditures in the 
MTP as given, while tax adjustments are assumed to be consistent with the 
inflation targets and automatic pricing mechanisms.  The Committee stated 
that, should the fiscal stance deviate significantl y from this framework and 
consequently have an adverse effect on inflation ou tlook, a revision in the 
monetary policy stance may be considered. 
16. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price  stability in the period ahead. 
Strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline a nd the structural reform 
agenda would support the improvement of Turkey’s so vereign risk, and thus 
facilitate macroeconomic and price stability. In th is respect, timely 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the MTP and the 
European Union accession process remains to be of u tmost importance. 
 
 