No: 2010 - 18 
17 June 2010 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: June 17, 2010 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç,  
M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has deci ded to keep one-week 
repo auction rate (the policy rate) and overnight rat es unchanged as follows: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 7 percent,   
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 6.50 p ercent, lending rate at 9 
percent, 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate at 2.50 percent, lending rate at 12 p ercent, 
d) The interest rate on overnight and one-week maturi ty borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions at 8  percent. 
 
Recent data suggest that the recovery in economic activity  is ongoing. Domestic 
demand growth is relatively stable, while uncertaintie s regarding external demand have 
become more significant. Therefore, it would take a whi le before industrial capacity 
utilization rates return to pre-crisis levels. Although employment conditions continue to 
improve, unemployment rates remain at high levels. 
The Committee has indicated that core inflation would continue to remain at 
levels below the year-end target and to follow a pat h consistent with the medium term 
targets. Moreover, it has also been noted that the fal l in unprocessed food prices and 
easing commodity prices have led to a more favorable in flation outlook than envisaged 
in the April Inflation Report, which is also having a positive impact on inflation 
expectations. 
In light of these developments, the Committee reitera ted that it may be necessary 
to maintain policy rates at current levels for some time , and to keep them at low levels 
for a long period.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or informat ion related to the inflation 
outlook may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
eight working days.  