 
No: 2010 - 23 
             27 July 2010  
 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: July 15, 2010 
 
 
  Inflation Developments  
1. Consumer prices decreased by 0.56 percent in Jun e and annual inflation 
declined by 0.73 percentage points to 8.37 percent.  The fall in annual inflation 
was due to plummeting food prices, as noted in the June summary of the 
Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) Meeting. Annual services 
inflation slowed down further, and core inflation i ndicators continued to be 
consistent with medium-term targets. 
2. Amid falling unprocessed food prices, annual foo d inflation sank to 5.62 
percent in June—lowest level in recent years. The o ngoing drop in fresh fruit 
and vegetable prices as well as meat prices also ha d a major impact on food 
prices. With falling processed meat prices in June,  the direct impact of meat 
prices on annual CPI inflation was down 0.2 percent age point month-on-month 
to 1.4 percentage points.  
3. The slowdown in annual services inflation became  more pronounced in June 
as falling meat prices began to have a favorable ef fect on catering prices. 
Moreover, seasonally adjusted data indicate that pr ices decelerated across all 
categories of services. Annual rent inflation conti nued to trend steadily down, 
declining to an unprecedented low of 4.21 percent s ince the inception of the 
CPI.  
4. The Committee has noted that the year-ago increa se in tobacco prices would 
have a base effect on the annual rate of increase i n July’s consumer prices. If 
tobacco prices remain unchanged in July, this base effect will drive annual CPI 
inflation down by about 0.5 percentage point.  
5. The effect of rising solid fuel and tap water pr ices on energy group prices was 
broadly offset by the fall in fuel prices amid lowe r international oil prices, 
producing only a modest increase in energy prices i n June. However, with the 
waning of the upward base effects that the Committe e noted in the June 
Summary, annual energy inflation dropped by 1.61 pe rcentage points to 12.63 percent. Unless international oil prices rise drama tically, the annual rate of 
increase in energy prices would continue to slow in  the second half of 2010.  
6. The year-on-year rate of increase in core goods (goods excluding food, 
energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) slow ed to 4.38 percent with 
the reversal of the base effect from last year’s ta x incentives on durable 
goods. The Committee has reiterated that the tax im pact would continue to 
have a downward impact on annual core goods inflati on in July and October. 
Moreover, Committee members have emphasized that, e ven when adjusted 
for tax effects and seasonal variations, the rate o f increase in prices of core 
goods has been decelerating. 
7. The Committee has noted that annual headline inf lation would display a 
significant drop in July due to aforementioned base  effects.   
 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
8. Recent data suggest that the recovery in economi c activity is ongoing. Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) expanded by 11.7 percent yea r-on-year during the 
first quarter owing primarily to the low base in th e comparable period last year. 
In fact, growing by a mere 0.1 percent quarter-on-q uarter in seasonally 
adjusted terms, GDP remained virtually flat. The Co mmittee has noted the 
large contraction in public construction investment s, and indicated that 
economic activity continues to pick up once the imp act of the public sector 
demand is excluded. 
9. Industrial production increased by 1.9 percent m onth-on-month during May in 
seasonally adjusted terms, up by 3 percent from the  first-quarter average 
during April-May. The Committee has indicated that production has surpassed 
pre-crisis levels in sectors more sensitive to dome stic demand but still remains 
low in sectors relatively more sensitive to foreign  demand. 
10. Domestic demand is displaying relatively stable  growth. April-May data on 
production and imports indicate that the demand for  consumer goods has 
been running above its previous quarter average. Co nsumer confidence 
indices and new orders data also point to a further  increase in private 
consumption. Therefore, the Committee expects priva te consumption demand 
to grow further quarter-on-quarter during the secon d quarter but slow down 
year-on-year as impacts of the low base effect fade s. 
11. Investment demand continues to recover, but rem ains below pre-crisis levels. 
The production of capital goods excluding vehicles continues to grow steadily, 
while imports of capital goods remain on the rise. Production and imports data 
suggest that private investments would increase sig nificantly year-on-year during the second quarter of 2010. Yet, the Committ ee has stated that the 
recently increased downside risks to foreign demand  owing to the problems in 
the euro area might dampen new investments, particu larly in the 
manufacturing industry. 
12. There are signs of a partial slowdown in foreig n demand. The export quantity 
index excluding gold rose for the fourth consecutiv e month in May, although 
recent readings indicate that the massive second-qu arter increase in exports 
may not be durable. According to the data from the Turkish Exporters 
Assembly, despite having expanded by 13.1 percent y ear-on-year in June, 
exports were down month-on-month in seasonally adju sted terms. Moreover, 
recent survey indicators for the manufacturing indu stry signal slowing export 
orders.  
13. The Committee has reiterated that the downside risks to the pace of foreign 
demand growth have risen amid the fiscal crisis in the euro area—Turkey’s 
largest export destination—and emphasized that the depreciation of the euro 
is another factor that would impede exports. While the July Consensus 
Forecasts do not offer a major change in euro area growth rates, there are 
significant compositional changes. Specifically, th e decreased contribution of 
consumption and investment expenditures, especially  in countries such as 
Germany and Italy, implies a weaker outlook for for eign demand of Turkey. 
The Committee has noted that these developments are  likely to have an 
adverse impact on Turkey’s economic activity in com ing months, implying that 
it would take a while before industrial capacity ut ilization rates return to pre-
crisis levels.  
14. Although employment conditions continue to impr ove, unemployment rates 
remain at high levels. Seasonally adjusted data ind icate that non-farm 
employment continued to recover in April. Weak fore ign demand continued to 
restrain industrial employment, while non-farm empl oyment returned to pre-
crisis levels owing to the recovery in construction  and services sectors. 
Nevertheless, the Committee reiterated that the hig h level of unemployment 
rates would continue to contain unit labor costs. 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
15. The Committee discussed the macroeconomic outlo ok and monetary policy 
stance underlying the baseline scenario of the July  Inflation Report. In light of 
the developments summarized above, the Committee me mbers indicated that 
it would be appropriate to base the revised forecas ts on a framework in which 
external demand conditions are weaker compared to t he previous Report, 
while domestic demand continues to recover as antic ipated, resource 
utilization stays at low levels, and thus the contr ibution of aggregate demand 
conditions to disinflation increases slightly. 16. The Committee has indicated that the core infla tion indicators remain 
consistent with the medium term targets. This devel opment, coupled with the 
fall in unprocessed food prices and easing commodit y prices, has led to a 
more favorable inflation outlook than envisaged in the April Inflation Report. 
17. In sum, the Committee members agreed that the b aseline scenario in the July 
Inflation Report would envisage that the monetary t ightening required to keep 
inflation in line with medium-term targets would st art later and would be more 
limited compared to the previous forecast. Accordin gly, the Committee 
reiterated that it may be necessary to maintain pol icy rates at current levels for 
some time, and to keep them at low levels for a lon g period. 
18. The Committee stated that risks regarding globa l economy persist. By 
influencing commodity prices and external demand co nditions, global 
economic activity would continue to be the main fac tor driving inflation 
dynamics and the monetary policy outlook. In this r espect, the Committee 
indicated that the timing and the extent of monetar y tightening to be 
implemented during 2011 under the baseline scenario  of the July Inflation 
Report may change depending on the course of the ec onomic activity. 
19. Recently, rising concerns regarding debt sustai nability in several euro-zone 
countries and the spillover effects to the financia l system have led to renewed 
turmoil across financial markets, underscoring the downside risks to the global 
economic recovery. Furthermore, ongoing problems in  credit, real estate and 
labor markets across developed economies, with litt le policy options left in 
case of another disruption to global economic activ ity, suggest that the 
downside risks regarding the pace of global growth are likely to persist for 
some time. The Committee indicated that, should the  global economy face a 
longer-than-anticipated period of anemic growth, wh ich would consequently 
delay the domestic recovery significantly, the mone tary tightening envisaged in 
2011 under the baseline scenario may be postponed t owards the end of 2011. 
Moreover, it was stated that, an outcome whereby gl obal economic problems 
intensify and contribute to a contraction of domest ic economic activity, may 
trigger a new easing cycle. By contrast, the Commit tee members underscored 
that, monetary tightening may be implemented in an earlier period during 
2011, should the recovery in economic activity turn  out to be faster than 
expected. 
20. The Committee members indicated that, despite t he increased downside risks 
pertaining to external demand, domestic demand rema ins strong. Although 
problems regarding the global economy have the pote ntial to restrain domestic 
demand through confidence and financing channels, c ountercyclical monetary 
policy and the ongoing improvement in employment co nditions are likely to 
support the recovery in domestic demand. On the oth er hand, given the relative improvement in the creditworthiness of Tur key during the post-crisis 
period, a possible strengthening in capital inflows  in the forthcoming period 
stands out as another factor that may lead to a fas ter recovery in the domestic 
demand in contrast to external demand. Should the d ivergence in the growth 
rates between domestic and external demand continue  in the forthcoming 
period, it would be necessary to utilize other poli cy instruments such as 
reserve requirement ratios and liquidity management  facilities more effectively. 
Accordingly, if the composition of strong domestic demand and weak external 
demand continue as envisaged, and if this pattern o f growth coexists with 
rapid credit expansion and a deterioration in the c urrent account balance, 
consequently leading to financial stability concern s, than the Committee may 
bring forward the measures outlined in the exit str ategy that are expected to 
be implemented until the end of 2010. 
21. The Committee will continue to monitor fiscal p olicy developments closely 
while formulating monetary policy. Since the second  half of 2009, economic 
activity has been stronger than envisaged in the Me dium Term Program 
(MTP), leading to a better-than-expected performanc e in budget revenues. 
Using this fiscal space mostly to reduce the govern ment debt would facilitate 
demand management and reduce any need for indirect tax hikes, therefore 
providing more flexibility regarding the conduct of  countercyclical monetary 
policy. In this respect, should the fiscal discipli ne implemented through 
institutional and structural improvements, such as enacting and establishing 
the fiscal rule, it would be possible to keep polic y rates at single-digit levels 
over the medium term. 
22. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price  stability in the period ahead. 
Strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline a nd the structural reform 
agenda would support the improvement of Turkey’s so vereign risk, and thus 
facilitate macroeconomic and price stability. In th is respect, timely 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the MTP and the 
European Union accession process remains to be of u tmost importance. 
 
 