No: 2010 – 40                       16 December 201 0  
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: December 16, 2010 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç,  
M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has deci ded to set the short 
term interest rates as follows: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) was reduced fro m 7 percent to 6.5 
percent, 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate was reduced  from 1.75 percent to 
1.50 percent, while lending rate was increased from 8.7 5 percent to 9 percent. 
The interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for  primary dealers via repo 
transactions was increased from 7.75 percent to 8 percent. 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate was kept at 0 percent, while lending r ate was increased from 
11.75 percent to 12 percent. 
Recent releases have been consistent with the outlook pre sented in the October 
Inflation Report. Although economic activity continues to  recover amid strong domestic 
demand, it would take a long time before industrial ca pacity utilization rates return to 
their pre-crisis levels due to weak external demand. Emp loyment conditions continue to 
improve, yet unemployment rates remain at high level s. With the additional support of 
falling unprocessed food prices, inflation is expected to  decline in the forthcoming 
period. 
Primary objective of the central bank is to achieve and  maintain price stability. 
Financial stability is one of the fundamental duties of  the Central Bank as well. The 
divergence between domestic and foreign demand growth  coupled with a rapid credit 
expansion is increasing the current account deficit, henc e contributing to risks regarding 
financial stability. Moreover, recent developments and related policy decisions in 
European and US economies have been exacerbating these  risks, necessitating a 
revision in the domestic policy mix. 
In this respect, the Committee has stated that a lower policy rate, a wider interest 
corridor, combined with higher required reserve ratios would serve as a more effective 
policy mix. Moreover, with regard to policy measures t o enhance financial stability, the 
Committee has suggested that it would be useful to dif ferentiate the required reserve 
ratios for different maturities of TL deposits in order  to encourage longer term funding, 
and to widen the scope of the reserve requirements. 
The Committee assesses that the net impact of these measur es on the monetary 
conditions will not be expansionary. The effects of toda y’s decisions will be monitored 
closely and additional measures will be implemented if  necessary.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or informa tion may lead the 
Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
eight working days.  