 
No: 2010 – 30 
28 September 2010 
 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: September 16, 2010 
 
 
  Inflation Developments  
1. Consumer prices increased by 0.40 percent in Aug ust and annual inflation 
rose by 0.75 percentage points to 8.33 percent. The  rise in annual inflation 
was largely due to increasing unprocessed food pric es, as noted in the August 
summary of the Monetary Policy Committee (the Commi ttee) Meeting. Annual 
services inflation continued to moderate, while cor e inflation indicators 
remained in line with medium-term targets. 
2. Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic bevera ges soared by 4.85 
percentage points to 10.37 percent. After having de clined for three months in a 
row, unprocessed food prices rose sharply in August  amid higher fresh fruit 
and vegetable prices, bringing unprocessed food inf lation up by 10.78 
percentage points to 18.66 percent year-on-year. Mo reover, unprocessed 
meat prices continued to rise, while changes in pro cessed food prices 
remained modest. 
3. The Committee members have noted that the extrem e volatility in food prices 
might continue to have a significant impact on annu al inflation in the short run. 
In fact, leading indicators suggest that annual inf lation would rise markedly in 
September owing to the sharp increases in unprocess ed food prices driven by 
higher vegetable prices. The Committee expects the upsurge to be temporary 
and annual inflation to be back on a downtrend by O ctober. 
4. Annual inflation in core goods and services cont inued to fall steadily in August. 
The annual rate of increase in prices of the relati vely more demand-sensitive 
services which exclude catering and transport servi ces, dropped to an all-time 
low of 2.83 percent. Similarly, the annual rate of increase in core goods (goods 
excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacc o and gold) continued to 
fall. The Committee has noted that annual core good s inflation declined to 2.2 
percent in tax-adjusted terms. Moreover, seasonally  adjusted data indicate 
that underlying inflation is in line with medium-te rm targets.  5. Against this background, the Committee has resta ted that inflation would 
increase temporarily in the short term before rever ting to a declining path 
starting from the last quarter of the year. 
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. Recent data releases are in line with the outloo k presented in the July Inflation 
Report. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew by 10.3 p ercent year-on-year 
and by a seasonally adjusted 3.7 percent quarter-on -quarter during the 
second quarter. The Committee has noted that the pu blic construction 
investment made a significant contribution to the a cceleration in quarterly GDP 
growth. However, it was also stated that, even excl uding public expenditures, 
the economy still recovered at a faster pace than i n the first quarter. 
7. Economic activity is on a milder recovery path f ollowing the strong growth in 
the second quarter. July and August data indicate t hat the economy slowed 
markedly in the third quarter. Industrial productio n ran below its second-
quarter average in July, while August’s capacity ut ilization rates pointed to a 
further slowdown in production. However, the Commit tee has emphasized that 
the August data may not be indicative of underlying  economic activity as the 
month was marked by Ramadan and political uncertain ty generated by the 
September referendum. In fact, new order indicators , which feed into industrial 
production after a two- to three-month lag, showed some recovery in August. 
8. Domestic demand displays a relatively stable out look. July data indicate that 
production and imports of consumer goods have been more robust than the 
second-quarter average. July-August survey indicato rs and consumer 
confidence indices show that the consumption contin ues to recover steadily in 
the third quarter without an acceleration. 
9. Investment demand continues to rebound, but rema ins below pre-crisis levels. 
The production of capital goods excluding vehicles and the imports of capital 
goods grew further in July. The steady improvement in firms’ investment 
expectations suggests that investments may continue  to recover over the 
upcoming period. Yet, the Committee has stated that  the uncertainty about the 
pace of recovery in foreign demand might continue t o dampen new 
investments, particularly in the manufacturing indu stry.  
10. Uncertainties regarding foreign demand persist.  The export quantity index 
excluding gold continued to fall in July. Recent fo reign trade data indicate that 
exports grew modestly in August and September. Surv ey indicators of 
manufacturing industry do not report a major increa se in exports. Therefore, in 
view of signs of slowing economic recovery across t he globe, the Committee expects that it would take a while before industria l capacity utilization rates 
return to pre-crisis levels. 
11. Although employment conditions continue to impr ove, unemployment rates 
remain at high levels. Industrial employment contin ued to recover in June, 
while services employment fell slightly in seasonal ly adjusted terms. Leading 
indicators for the third quarter suggest that the h alt in non-farm employment 
growth is temporary and employment would continue t o rise gradually. 
Nevertheless, the Committee has reiterated that the  unemployment rates 
would continue to remain at higher levels compared to the pre-crisis period for 
some time, containing the unit labor costs. 
 
  Risks and Monetary Policy  
12. Committee members noted that although GDP growt h was strong during the 
second quarter, recent data releases suggest a rela tively modest recovery for 
the second half of the year. External demand contin ues to suppress aggregate 
demand, notwithstanding the steady increases in dom estic demand. 
Employment and capacity utilization indicators sugg est that upside pressures 
on inflation are likely to be contained. Accordingl y, core inflation indicators are 
expected to remain consistent with the medium-term targets.  In light of these 
developments, the Committee has reiterated that it would be necessary to 
maintain policy rate at current levels for some tim e, and to keep it at low levels 
for a long period. 
13. Although the Committee does not see an accelera tion in aggregate demand, 
the continued divergence between external and domes tic demand 
necessitates that the composition of demand be clos ely monitored especially 
in terms of risks regarding the current account bal ance and financial stability. 
The strengthening perceptions that developed econom ies would keep their 
policy rates at low levels for a long period, and r elative improvement in Turkish 
creditworthiness during the post-crisis period, com bined with the surge in 
capital flows toward emerging markets, have been in creasing the risks 
regarding the divergence between the domestic and e xternal demand. While 
not yet a significant concern regarding financial s tability, the Committee 
members have indicated that these developments supp ort the implementation 
of the “exit strategy” measures. Therefore, the Com mittee has indicated that it 
would be appropriate to proceed with the measures o utlined in the exit 
strategy that were envisaged to be implemented by e nd-2010. 
14. Therefore, also noting that the liquidity condi tions have evolved as envisaged, 
the Committee has decided to implement the second s tep of the technical rate 
adjustment mentioned in Article (b) of the 16 th  paragraph in the “Monetary Policy Exit Strategy” document published on the 14 th  of April 2010, and 
decided to widen the gap between the one-week repo rate and the overnight 
borrowing rate by 25 basis points. Moreover, as rei terated in the exit strategy 
document, both the gap between the overnight lendin g and borrowing rates 
and the gap between these rates and the one-week re po rate could be used 
as operational tools of monetary policy. In this re spect, in order to decrease 
the overfunding to the market and leave less end-da y excess liquidity, there 
could be another reduction in the borrowing rates i n the forthcoming period.  
15. The Committee members have indicated that the g lobal crisis has 
demonstrated the importance of central banks having  an auxiliary financial 
stability mandate as well as the objective of price  stability. In this context it was 
reiterated that, should the recent surge in capital  flows coexist with rapid credit 
expansion and a deterioration in the current accoun t balance, thereby leading 
to financial stability concerns, other policy instr uments such as reserve 
requirement ratios and liquidity management facilit ies would be utilized more 
effectively.  
16. The Committee members underscored that, as stat ed in the 19 th  paragraph of 
the exit strategy document, depending on future dev elopments—for example, 
if the pace of credit expansion exceeds desired lev els—reserve requirement 
ratios may be used more actively as a macroprudenti al tool. In this framework, 
it was stated that, terminating the remuneration of  Turkish lira required 
reserves would facilitate the effective use of rese rve requirement ratios as a 
policy tool to mitigate macroeconomic and financial  risks when necessary. 
17. The Committee has indicated that the recent vol atility in commodity prices 
pose risks regarding short-term inflation forecasts . Although the uncertainty 
regarding the global economy continues to suppress energy and industrial 
metal prices, climate conditions are having an adve rse impact on agricultural 
commodities. Ongoing increases in the prices of whe at and cotton, which are 
inputs for core consumer goods, necessitate the nee d to monitor commodity 
prices closely. 
18. The Committee members stated that the significa nt fluctuations in food prices 
are the main factors increasing inflation volatilit y. Early indicators suggest that 
inflation would display a significant temporarily j ump in September owing to 
rapid increases in unprocessed food prices. The Com mittee foresees that 
vegetable and fruit prices would display a partial correction in the last quarter 
of the year, and the measures taken regarding meat imports would contain the 
increases in unprocessed food prices. Nevertheless,  it was stated that 
fluctuations in unprocessed food prices continue to  pose risks regarding short-
term inflation forecasts. 19. The Central Bank monitors fiscal policy develop ments closely while 
formulating monetary policy. The Committee members have indicated that the 
delay in the enactment of the fiscal rule has incre ased the importance of 
current fiscal policy implementation. Budget realiz ations in the first eight 
months of 2010 suggest that extra revenues arising due to stronger-than-
envisaged economic activity are largely being used to reduce government 
debt. Sustaining fiscal discipline in the period ah ead by bolstering institutional 
and structural improvements is crucial, both in ter ms of providing more 
flexibility regarding the conduct of countercyclica l monetary policy, and also for 
keeping the market interest rates at low levels per manently. In this respect, the 
Committee will continue to monitor the fiscal devel opments and their impact on 
inflation outlook closely. 
20. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price  stability in the period ahead. 
Strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline a nd the structural reform 
agenda would support the improvement of Turkey’s so vereign risk, and thus 
facilitate macroeconomic and price stability. In th is respect, timely 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term 
Program and the European Union accession process re mains to be of utmost 
importance. 
 
 
 