No: 2010 – 03 
26 January 2010 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: January 14, 2010 
 
 
  Inflation Developments  
1. Consumer prices increased by 0.53 percent in December, driving annual 
inflation up by 1 percentage point to 6.53 percent, o wing to rising unprocessed 
food prices and base effects stemming from the low levels o f last year’s 
energy and clothing prices. In other words, the December  rise in annual 
inflation is largely attributable to transitory factor s and therefore does not point 
to a deterioration in underlying trend inflation. 
2. Unprocessed food prices continued to soar in December, r ecording the largest 
fourth-quarter increase in six years. In contrast, the deve lopments regarding 
processed food prices have remained favorable. 
3. Energy prices accounted for most of the base effect tha t drove annual inflation 
higher in December. In fact, although energy prices rose  by a mere 0.65 
percent month-on-month, annual energy inflation was u p by 3.4 percentage 
points. Increases in prices of certain energy items in Janua ry, due to the 
Special Consumption Tax and electricity price hikes, will a dd around 0.4 
percentage points to headline inflation. Given these ad justments and base 
effects, the annual rate of increase in energy prices is e xpected to increase 
significantly in January. 
4. The annual rate of increase in the prices of goods excl uding energy and food 
slowed down in December to 6.15 percent, mainly due to  falling prices of 
durable goods and pharmaceuticals. On the other hand, a nnual clothing and 
footwear inflation increased owing to base effects. The new tax measures 
implemented on alcoholic beverages and tobacco products in January to 
restore government balances are expected to add about 1.1  percentage points 
to CPI inflation. 
5. Despite having increased slightly during December, ann ual services inflation 
remains subdued. Higher meat prices continued to weigh o n catering prices, 
while annual rental inflation declined further, and prices for transport and other 
services increased modestly. 
6. The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) ind icated that tax 
adjustments and base effects would cause inflation to rise significantly over the next two months and to remain above the target for  some time. Yet, the 
underlying trend implied by core inflation indicators is expected to remain at 
levels consistent with medium-term targets. In this respect,  it was emphasized 
that inflation would display a declining trend once th e temporary factors taper 
off. 
 
 Factors Affecting Inflation  
7. Recent data releases suggest that a moderate recovery i n economic activity is 
ongoing. Industrial production grew slightly month-on- month during November 
2009 in seasonally adjusted terms; yet, the average prod uction for the 
October-November period was higher from a quarter earl ier. Being on a slight 
uptrend since the second quarter, capacity utilization con tinued to grow 
modestly in the fourth quarter. 
8. Industrial production contracted by 2.2 percent year- on-year in November, but 
grew by 5.8 percent year-on-year in calendar adjusted terms. Accordingly, the 
Committee once again highlighted the working-day effe ct due to religious 
holidays during the final quarter and the base effect resulting from the marked 
decline in production a year ago. Committee members no ted that these effects 
would cause industrial production to increase substantially  year-on-year in 
December, and stated that assessments regarding the economi c recovery 
should be based on data adjusted for seasonal and calenda r-related effects. 
9. Leading indicators suggest that domestic demand continu es to recover 
modestly. Consumption demand appears to have lost moment um following the 
expiration of tax cuts intended to spur economic activity. F urthermore, the 
rising trend in the production of consumer goods slowed d uring October-
November. Imports of consumer goods have almost flattened.  Despite a 
further recovery during the fourth quarter, production  and imports data 
regarding investment demand indicate that investment dem and still hovers 
around lows levels.  
10. Foreign demand continues to grow moderately. Octob er-November average of 
the export quantity index was up by 0.7 percent year-on -year, increasing in 
quarterly seasonally adjusted terms. The course of foreig n demand in the 
upcoming period would be closely linked to the pace of t he global recovery. 
According to survey data, export orders do not point to a  strong rebound in 
exports in the short term, while insufficient foreign de mand continues to rank 
high among factors that prevent manufacturing industries from operating at full 
capacity. Projections for the euro area, our largest tra ding partner, suggest 
that it would take a long time for foreign demand to  return to previous levels. 
  
11. The outlook for employment and wages is of critical importance for domestic 
demand over the medium term. Real wages had dropped sh arply following the 
employment slump during late 2008, and have restrained  consumption 
demand. In line with the reflection of the moderate economic recovery on the 
labor market, real wages started to rise again by the t hird quarter of 2009. 
Nevertheless, the current level of foreign demand continu es to contain 
economic activity and employment in general by suppressing  industrial 
activity. Hence, real wages in the short term are unlikel y to bounce back to the 
levels associated with past episodes of strong economic growth , and therefore 
wage developments would continue to restrain domestic dem and for quite 
some time.  
12. In sum, while the downtrend in consumer confidence i ndices and the ongoing 
risks regarding the global economy continue to pose uncert ainties regarding 
aggregate demand, the economy continues on a moderate recovery track. 
Given the current level of the economic activity and the p ace of economic 
recovery, the Committee expects that capacity utilization and employment 
conditions would take a long time to fully recover. 
 
 Monetary Policy and Risks 
13. The Committee indicated that tax adjustments and ba se effects would cause 
inflation to rise significantly over the next two months and also remain above 
target for some time. In this respect, January Inflation  Report forecasts were 
revised significantly upwards for 2010, compared to the p revious Report. 
However, noting that the underlying trend implied by  core inflation indicators 
would remain at levels consistent with medium-term targe ts, the Committee 
emphasized that, given the low levels of resource utiliza tion, the precarious 
state of labor markets, and global economic conditions, ge neral pricing 
behavior would not be affected adversely by the tempora ry rise in inflation, 
and therefore, inflation would display a declining tr end once the transitory 
effects taper off. Therefore, there has been no major change in the January 
Inflation Report regarding the inflation forecasts for  2011 and thereafter. 
14. The Committee noted that credit markets have continu ed to improve in 
response to the monetary easing and the improvements in global risk 
perceptions. The tightness in credit conditions have been m oderating since the 
publication of the July Inflation Report. Easing finan cial conditions and 
declining loan rates have been strengthening the expansio nary impact of 
monetary policy. The October Inflation Report had stat ed that the credit 
channel would begin to support domestic economic activity d uring the fourth quarter of the year. In fact, credit demand has started  to recover in this period, 
especially with commercial loans picking up significantly. H owever, lingering 
problems across the global economy are not resolved complet ely and there 
are still uncertainties regarding the strength of the r ecovery. Accordingly, the 
Committee has emphasized that it would be necessary to ke ep policy rates at 
low levels for a long period of time. 
15. The outlook for domestic economy has been largely sha ped by global 
developments since the intensification of the global crisis during the last 
quarter of 2008. Given the important role of the tra de and global financial 
channels in the contraction of domestic economic activity dur ing 2009, it is 
expected that the global developments would continue to be the main driving 
factor for the outlook for domestic activity and inflatio n in the forthcoming 
period. Accordingly, the Committee assessed that both the  risks on global and 
domestic economic activity, as well as their impact on infla tion should be 
considered jointly. 
16. Rising budget deficits and ongoing problems in credi t and real estate markets 
continue to pose downside risks for global activity, especial ly for developed 
economies. Although the probability of another disrupt ion in global economic 
activity has been decreasing, it is still an important sour ce of downside risk on 
domestic economic activity and inflation. Should the glob al conditions 
deteriorate again, and consequently delay the domestic recovery, the 
Committee would consider further monetary easing. 
17. Despite the prevailing downside risks on global and d omestic economic 
activity, upside risks have also been emerging since the second  half of 2009, 
given the pace of global recovery over this period. Moreo ver, it should be 
noted that the impact of the unprecedented expansionary  policy measures 
since the last quarter of 2008 would be observed with a lag. Similarly, the 
1025 basis points cumulative easing in policy rates of the Central Bank of 
Turkey (CBT) between November 2008 and November 2009 w ould also be 
fully transmitted with a lag. In this respect, the Comm ittee indicated that, 
should the recovery in domestic economic activity turn out t o be faster than 
expected, the limited monetary policy tightening impli ed by the baseline 
scenario in the Inflation Report could be implemented earlier than envisaged. 
18. According to the Committee members, the fact that i nflation will rise in the 
forthcoming period due to base effects and recent tax hike s, poses an 
important risk factor through its potential impact on in flation expectations. 
Several adverse factors (such as food, oil, base effects and a dministered price 
hikes) have been leading to upward movements in inflatio n since the last 
quarter of 2009. Although these factors are temporary,  they will likely cause 
headline inflation to stay at elevated levels for someti me. It is crucial that the economic agents fully understand the temporary nature o f these developments 
while forming their medium- and longer-term expectati ons. Given the low 
levels of resource utilization, the adverse impact of the depressed labor 
market conditions on consumption expenditure, and the gra dual removal of 
fiscal stimulus, these temporary factors as well as other cost  push pressures 
would not lead to a significant deterioration in gene ral pricing behavior. 
Currently, services and core inflation are consistent with medium-term inflation 
targets, and resource utilization is at low levels. There fore, it is foreseen that 
the policy rates would be maintained at low levels for a long period. However, 
it should be underscored that the Committee will not h esitate to tighten 
monetary policy sooner than envisioned under the baselin e scenario of the 
Inflation Report, should any unforeseen developments le ad to a deterioration 
in general price setting behavior. 
19. Increasing budget deficits on a worldwide scale, especi ally in developed 
economies, continue to pose risks on inflation expectations a nd thus on 
longer-term global interest rates. Countries with rela tively sounder banking 
systems and prudent fiscal policies would be more resilient  against these 
risks. In this respect, the Committee will continue to mon itor fiscal policy 
developments closely while formulating monetary policy. Should the goals set 
out in the Medium Term Program be implemented throu gh institutional and 
structural measures, rather than tax and administered pri ce hikes, it would be 
possible to keep policy rates at single digit levels throug hout the forecast 
horizon. 
20. The Committee Members continue to view the course of  oil and other 
commodity prices as an important risk factor. Ample liquid ity driven by 
countercyclical policies on a global scale facilitates speculat ive movements for 
commodity prices. Fast growth trends in countries like Chin a and India, and 
the rising share of these economies in global commodity d emand, exacerbate 
these speculative motives. Therefore, oil and other commod ity price 
developments may continue to rise, even under a scenario o f a gradual global 
economic recovery. At this point it is worth noting that weak domestic demand 
conditions would limit the pass-through stemming from up side cost-push 
shocks. Therefore, the Committee will not react to the f irst round effects of 
short-term volatility in commodity prices, especially when  the resource 
utilization remains at depressed levels. However, if an u ptrend in commodity 
prices reflects a strong and durable rebound in global e conomic activity that 
would in turn have adverse effects on inflation expectatio ns, then the monetary 
policy will be tightened appropriately to keep inflat ion in line with medium-term 
inflation targets. 
21. Since the last quarter of 2008, the CBT, without endangering its main objective 
of price stability, has focused on containing the adverse e ffects of the global crisis on the domestic economy, and this task has been achieved  to a large 
extent. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price st ability in the period 
ahead. Strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline  and the structural 
reform agenda would support the improvement of Turkey’ s sovereign risk, and 
thus facilitate macroeconomic and price stability. In this respect, timely 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by th e Medium Term 
Program and the European Union accession process remains to  be of utmost 
importance. 