No: 2011 – 57  30 November 2011  
 
 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: November 23, 2011 
 
Inflation Developments 
1. In October, consumer prices were up 3.27 percent an d annual inflation 
climbed to 7.66 percent. October price developments  were highlighted by 
increases in administered prices, which contributed  to the monthly inflation by 
1.35 percentage points. While core goods inflation continued to increase 
parallel to the exchange rate movements, the prices  of services maintaineda 
moderate course in this period.  
2. Administered prices went up due to the tax hikes  and adjustments in energy 
prices. In this period, the Special Consumption Tax  (SCT) rates were raised 
on some motor vehicles, mobile phones, alcoholic be verages and tobacco 
products. As foreseen, the largest contributor to i nflation within SCT hikes 
became tobacco products with 0.8 percentage points.  Price adjustments in 
energy due to the increases in electricity and natu ral gas tariffs added 0.5 
percentage points to inflation. Moreover, it should  be noted that the 
adjustments in tobacco products will further contri bute around 0.2 percentage 
points to November inflation. 
3. Despite an increase by 4.04 percent in the price s of food and alcoholic 
beverages in October, annual inflation in this grou p continued to decline due 
to the base effect in unprocessed food prices. Owin g to the price increases in 
fresh fruits and vegetables amid adverse weather co nditions, unprocessed 
food prices rose by 7.56 percent. On the processed food front, the rise in 
annual inflation came to a halt in October. Due to the rapid increases in 
unprocessed food prices and the base effects, annua l food inflation is 
expected to rise markedly during the last two month s of the year. 
4. Prices of services rose by 0.56 percent in Octob er, and annual services 
inflation went up to 6.63 percent. Seasonally adjus ted data point to a 
deceleration in services inflation. Annual core goo ds inflationcontinued to 
increase in this period due to the ongoing exchange  rate pass-through, 
reaching 8.77 percent in October. This rise was att ributed to durable goods 
prices in particular. Meanwhile annual inflation we nt up in theclothing group as 
well. Thus, the annual inflation of the core price indicators displayed an 
increase, while the seasonally adjusted data exhibi ted a relatively milder trend.  
 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
5. Recent data releases point to a notable reductio n in economic growth in the 
second half of the year. Industrial production disp layed a modest 
growthconsistent with the slowing domestic demand a nd deteriorating global 
outlook. Capacity utilization rates remained below the pre-crisis levels. The 
Committee noted that global problems would continue  to put a cap on the 
industrial activity in the forthcoming period. 
6. The final domestic demand continues to slowdown.  The depreciation in the 
Turkish Lira and recent tax adjustments coupled wit h the uncertainties 
regarding the global economy, are expected to weake n the demand for 
durable goods, particularly the sales of vehicles, in the forthcoming period. 
Besides, the decline in consumer and investor confi dence feed into this 
downtrend.Moreover, the recent and notable slowdown  in consumer loans 
also supports this outlook.  
7. The Committee indicated that the lagged effects of the policy measures 
undertaken since November 2010 to rebalancethe dome stic and external 
demand would be more pronounced in the last quarter  of the year. 
Additionally, the restrictiveimpact of global probl ems on the externalfinancing 
may contribute to the tightening in domestic lendin g conditions in the 
forthcoming period. Besidesthe developments in cred it conditions, thelow 
levels in capacity utilization rates coupled with t he mounting uncertainties in 
demand pose a downward risk on investments. All the se indicators signal that 
the deceleration in domestic demand will continue. 
8. External demand remains weak. Recent downward re vision of medium-term 
growth forecasts for the U.S. and the euro area poi nts to a steadily worsening 
outlook for the global economy. The Committee under lined that the outlook for 
the world economy noticeably deteriorated compared to the first half of the 
year and that global problems would continue to res train foreign demand 
notwithstanding the competitive advantage provided by the exchange rate 
movements. 
9. Parallel to the economic activity, the slowdown in seasonally adjusted non-
farm employment continued in August. Meanwhile, une mployment rates 
declined owing to the fall in the labor force parti cipation rate. Contrary to the 
robust course in the construction sector, employmen t in services slowed down, 
driven by trade, restaurants, hotels, transport and  communication. 
Employment in the industrial sector declined in thi s period, whereas leading indicators point that global problems will continue  to put a cap on the 
employment conditions in the sector. 
 
  Risks and Monetary Policy 
10. In light of these developments, the Committee h as indicated that the 
rebalancing between the domestic and external deman d is ongoing as 
envisaged. The rebalancing takes place through impo rts, as the external 
demand remains weak due to prevailing problems rega rding the global 
economy. In fact, seasonally adjusted real imports data suggest to a slowdown 
since the second quarter. 
11. The Committee has underscored the key role of c redits in the rebalancing 
process. Recent slowdown in credit growth has been restraining the amount of 
expenditures financed through borrowing. With the c redit growth decelerating 
to more reasonable levels, the desired increase in private savings has already 
started to take place. Accordingly, the improvement  in the current account 
balance is expected to become more significant in t he final months of the year. 
12. The Committee has noted that inflation will dis play a rapid increase in the 
short-term due to the base effects from unprocessed  food prices. Base effect 
will be stronger in November and inflation is expec ted to exceed the target 
significantly at the end of the year. The Central B ank has delivered a strong 
tightening in October in order to prevent the poten tial second round effects of 
this development. The tightening is having an impac t on credit and domestic 
demand as of the final quarter. In this respect, do mestic demand is expected 
to follow a moderate path and second round effects of the temporary price 
movements will be contained in the forthcoming peri ods.  
13. The Committee members have emphasized the impor tance of having a 
flexible monetary policy framework against the exce ptionally high level of 
uncertainty across global financial markets. Curren tly, active use of the 
interest rate corridor through effective liquidity management provides the 
required flexibility. In this context, monetary pol icy stance can be changed at a 
daily frequency by adjusting the liquidity operatio ns. The impact of the 
measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and  inflation expectations 
will be monitored closely and the amount of Turkish  lira funding via one-week 
repo auctions will be timely adjusted on both sides , if needed. 
14. Developments in the financial markets are monit ored closely because of the 
persisting uncertainty regarding global economy. Es pecially, ongoing concerns 
on the sovereign debt dynamics in the euro area and  the possibility of a 
contagion to financial markets which would further deepen the global problems 
emerge as a main risk factor. In line with the stra tegy formulated at the interim meeting of August 4, 2011, the Committee will conti nue to monitor global 
developments closely and take the needed measures p romptly to maintain the 
stability in the domestic financial markets. 
15. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price  stability while preserving 
financial stability as a supplementary objective. T o this end, the impact of the 
macroprudential measures taken by the CBRT and othe r institutions on the 
inflation outlook will be assessed carefully. Stren gthening the commitment to 
fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda in the medium term would 
support the relative improvement of Turkey’s sovere ign risk, and thus facilitate 
macroeconomic and price stability. Sustaining the f iscal discipline will also 
provide more flexibility for monetary policy and su pport the social welfare by 
keeping long term interest rates permanently at low  levels. In this respect, 
timely implementation of the structural reforms env isaged by the new Medium 
Term Program remains to be of utmost importance. 
 
 
 