No: 2011 – 47  26 October 2011  
 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: October 20, 2011 
 
Inflation Developments 
1. In September, consumer prices were up by 0.75 pe rcent and annual inflation 
went down to 6.15 percent. As envisaged, the annual  rate of core price 
indicators kept rising parallel to the exchange rat e movements, while the 
underlying trend of the prices of services remained  moderate in sub-categories 
except transportation.  
2. Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic bever ages group declined to 2.23 
percent due to the base effect in unprocessed food prices. Besides the base 
effects, monthly unprocessed food prices displayed a positive outlook owing to 
the prices of fruits and vegetables as well. On the  other hand, price increases 
which spread across sub-categories in the processed  food group continued in 
September, bringing annual inflation up to9.07 perc ent. Floods in October are 
estimated to push up the unprocessed food prices to  some extent; however, 
the high base effect of the last year is expected t o contain the group's annual 
inflation.  
3. Prices of services rose by 0.88 percent in Septe mber, and annual services 
inflation went up to 6.36 percent. Price increases in fuel and processed food 
continued to spill over into prices of transport an d catering services. In 
September, annual inflation went up across all sub- categories of services, 
while underlying trend was more benign, as suggeste d by the seasonally 
adjusted data.   
4. Annual core goods inflation reached 7.64 percent  in September amid the 
depreciation of the Turkish lira. Prices of durable  consumer goods became the 
largest contributor of this increase. The annual in flation in clothing group, 
which has been rising steadily since November 2010,  declined in September.  
However, this is likely to reflect the season-speci fic temporary discounts. 
Owing to the protective measures in textiles and ap parel imports, inflation in 
the clothing group is expected to rise again in the  last quarter of the year.  
5. Administered price increases will have an upward  effect on inflation in the 
short term. The Special Consumption Tax rates were raised on some motor 
vehicles, mobile phones, alcoholic beverages and to bacco products by a 
Decision by the Board of Ministers, which was publi shed on the Official 
Gazette on October 13, 2011. The impact of the tax hikes on consumer inflation will occur mainly through the increases i n the prices of tobacco 
products, while the contribution of other items wil l remain relatively small. 
 
    Factors Affecting Inflation 
 
6. Recent data releases suggest that there will be a notable reduction in 
economic growth in the second half of the year. The  August data justified the 
Committee's evaluation that production developments  in July do not reflect the 
main trend. As a matter of fact, seasonally adjuste d industrial production 
contracted in August, returning to the levels in Ju ne. The Committee stated 
that global problems would continue to restrain ind ustrial activity. 
7. Final domestic demand continues to slow down. Du e to the depreciation in the 
Turkish Lira, the demand for durable goods, particu larly the sales of vehicles, 
is expected to keep weakening. Besides the weak cou rse of consumer 
confidence, the marked slowdown in loans supports t his view. In addition to 
credit developments, the low levels of capacity uti lization rates and mounting 
uncertainty in demand put a cap on investments. All  of these developments 
signal that the slowdown in domestic demand may per sist. 
8. External demand remains weak. Recent downward re vision of growth 
forecasts for the U.S. and the euro area points to a steadily worsening outlook 
for the global economy. The Committee underlined th at the outlook for the 
world economy noticeably deteriorated compared to t he first half of the year 
and that global problems would continue to restrain  foreign demand. 
9. Recent data releases suggest that the rebalancin g between the domestic and 
external demand is ongoing as envisaged. The Commit tee stated that external 
demand remains weak, yet the persisting slowdown in  domestic demand 
would restrain imports in the forthcoming period. W ith the credit growth 
decelerating to more reasonable levels, the desired  increase in private savings 
has already started to take place. Accordingly, the  Committee has noted that 
there is a significant improvement in the current a ccount balance and this 
trend will be more evident in the final quarter of the year.    
10. In July, seasonally adjusted non-farm employmen t posted a limited increase, 
while unemployment rates declined owing to the fall  in the labor force 
participation rate. In this period, increases remai ned modest in the services 
and construction sectors, which have been marked by  high employment 
growth rates since the second half of 2010. Meanwhi le, the downward trend in 
the industrial sector employment continued. Leading  indicators point that 
employment conditions in the industrial sector are expected to remain weak. Given the slowdown in economic activity, the Commit tee envisaged that 
employment conditions in the particular service sec tors such as trade and 
transport-communications would deteriorate. 
 
     Monetary Policy and Risks 
11. The Committee has assessed the forecasts prepar ed for the October Inflation 
Report. It was indicated that inflation would rise significantly in the upcoming 
months due to the recent excessive depreciation of the Turkish lira, base 
effects from unprocessed food prices and the recent  adjustments in 
administered prices. The Committee has reached full  agreement stating that 
the Central Bank should not tolerate these developm ents to have an adverse 
impact on medium term inflation expectations and in flation outlook. In this 
respect, the Committee has decided to widen the int erest rate corridor by 
increasing the lending rate significantly. 
12. The projections have been based on the assumpti on that the policy reaction of 
the Central Bank will prevent the second round effe cts. Moreover, the 
Committee members indicated that, given the weak pr ospects for the global 
economy, the course of commodity prices would also support the disinflation 
process. Accordingly, the forecasts were based on a n outlook where inflation 
decelerates gradually starting from early 2012 and materializes at levels close 
to target by the end of 2012. 
13. The fact that inflation will hover above target  in the short term poses risks 
regarding inflation expectations and price setting behavior. The Committee 
has adopted a policy stance as of October aiming to  eliminate these risks. The 
risks will be closely monitored and necessary measu res will be taken to avoid 
a deterioration in the inflation outlook. 
14. The medium term projections assume that global outlook will stay weak for a 
long period, but the situation will not worsen furt her. Nevertheless, the 
Committee members noted that uncertainties regardin g the global economy 
continue to be an important concern. Especially, mo unting problems regarding 
sovereign debt of the euro area economies continue to pose downside risks 
on the global economy. Concerns regarding the debt sustainability of euro 
area economies have further increased since the pub lication of the July 
Inflation Report, increasing the concerns of a poss ible contagion to region’s 
banking sector. The Committee will continue to moni tor global developments 
closely; and in line with the strategy formulated a t the interim meeting of 
August 4, 2011, will take the needed measures promp tly to maintain the 
stability in the domestic financial markets. 15. The Committee will continue to monitor fiscal p olicy developments closely 
while formulating monetary policy. In this respect,  our forecasts presented in 
the baseline scenario take the Medium Term Program as given and thus 
assume that fiscal discipline will be maintained. A  revision in the monetary 
policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly 
from this framework and consequently have an advers e effect on the medium-
term inflation outlook. 
16. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price  stability while preserving 
financial stability as a supplementary objective. T o this end, the impact of the 
macroprudential measures taken by the CBRT and othe r institutions on the 
inflation outlook will be assessed carefully. Stren gthening the commitment to 
fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda in the medium term would 
support the relative improvement of Turkey’s sovere ign risk, and thus facilitate 
macroeconomic and price stability. Sustaining the f iscal discipline will also 
provide more flexibility for monetary policy and su pport the social welfare by 
keeping long term interest rates permanently at low  levels. In this respect, 
timely implementation of the structural reforms env isaged by the new Medium 
Term Program remains to be of utmost importance. 
 