 
 
No: 2011 – 03 
25 January 2011  
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: January 20, 2011  
 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. In December, consumer prices decreased by 0.30 p ercent, and annual 
inflation fell to 6.40 percent. Thus, the annual in flation rate was quite close to 
the end-2010 target of 6.5 percent. Unprocessed foo d prices continued to fall, 
while the inflation in services and core goods rose  slightly, yet remained in line 
with medium-term targets. Headline inflation would continue to decelerate in 
coming months, mainly due to base effects, whereas the annual rate of 
increase in core indicators is expected to increase , albeit modestly.  
2. Unprocessed food prices continued to fall with a  December outturn of 5.79 
percent. Prices of fresh fruits and vegetables as w ell as red meat decreased. 
As stated in the October Inflation Report, fruit an d vegetable production 
forecasts for 2010 suggested that fruit and vegetab le prices were rising only 
temporarily and would see a correction in the final  quarter. Indeed, increases 
in fruit and vegetable prices were followed by larg er-than-expected decreases 
during the fourth quarter, bringing the annual unpr ocessed food inflation down 
from 31.28 percent in October to 8.52 percent at ye ar-end.  
3. Regarding processed food, processed meat prices declined while prices of 
bread and cereals and solid and liquid fats increas ed on rising international 
food prices. Thus, after soaring at an unprecedente d rate amid higher 
unprocessed food prices during the third quarter, t he annual inflation in food 
and nonalcoholic beverages slowed to 7.02 percent, bringing the group's 
contribution to annual inflation down to 1.94 perce ntage points at year-end 
from as high as 4.67 percentage points over 2010.  
4. Energy prices rose by 2.73 percent in December a mid higher fuel and bottled 
gas prices driven by rising international oil price s and exchange rate 
developments. Moreover, water tariffs went up in a number of cities. 
Therefore, after slowing in the second half of 2010 , the annual energy inflation 
increased to 9.96 percent in December.  
5. The services inflation rate registered an all-ti me year-end low of 4.24 percent. 
Although services inflation rose slightly in Decemb er due to higher communication prices, inflation was down in rents, hotels, restaurants and 
transport services. The annual inflation in core go ods (goods excluding food, 
energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) rose  to 1.70 percent owing to 
December's lower-than-average seasonal discounts on  clothing and footwear. 
Overall, the annual rate of increase in core inflat ion indicators was slightly 
faster in December but remained in line with medium -term targets. 
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. Recent releases have been consistent with the ou tlook presented in the 
October Inflation Report. Despite falling month-on- month in November, 
industrial production was significantly higher than  the third-quarter average 
during October-November owing to sharp increases in  October. Leading 
indicators suggest that November's production loss would be offset in 
December. In fact, the fourth-quarter capacity util ization rates and 
expectations for new orders point to a faster produ ction growth than in the 
third quarter. These developments confirm the Commi ttee's expectation of a 
renewed acceleration in economic activity for the f inal quarter of 2010. 
7. Economic activity continues to recover amid stro ng domestic demand. The 
production and imports of consumer goods were highe r during October-
November than the third-quarter average. The fourth -quarter improvement in 
survey indicators, sales data and consumer confiden ce points to an ongoing 
recovery in private consumption demand. Yet, the Co mmittee expects the 
recent policy measures to restrain the pace of reco very in loans and domestic 
demand over the upcoming period. 
8. The production and imports of investment goods, particularly those related to 
motor vehicles, increased significantly during Octo ber-November compared to 
the third-quarter average.  Indicators for the last quarter suggest that privat e 
investments would accelerate quarter-on-quarter and  continue to rise sharply 
year-on-year . The Committee expects the robust growth in investme nts to 
continue into coming months amid supportive monetar y conditions and 
reduced demand uncertainty . Indeed, both the gradual rise in capacity 
utilization rates and the manufacturing industry in vestments recently hitting a 
four-year high support this observation. However, C ommittee members have 
noted that foreign demand uncertainties would conti nue to slow the pace of 
recovery in investments, particularly in the manufa cturing industry. 
9. Uncertainties remain about foreign demand. Altho ugh the export quantity 
index excluding gold increased quarter-on-quarter d uring October-November 
after declining in the third quarter, leading indic ators for exports and new 
orders show no sign of a strong recovery in the sho rt term. In fact, exports have grown at quite a weaker and more volatile pace  than domestic demand 
during the recovery. Having noted that industrial c apacity utilization rates 
remain below their pre-crisis levels due to weak fo reign demand, the 
Committee expects this slowdown to continue for a w hile in view of the 
prospects of a weak global economic recovery. 
10. Although employment conditions continue to impr ove, unemployment rates 
remain at high levels. Non-farm employment increase d during September-
November in seasonally adjusted terms. Leading indi cators point to an 
acceleration in December's non-farm employment grow th, confirming the 
Committee's expectation that the third-quarter paus e was temporary and 
employment growth would resume by the end of the ye ar. Nevertheless, the 
Committee has reiterated that unemployment rates wo uld remain higher than 
pre-crisis levels for some time, containing unit la bor costs.  
11. Against this backdrop, the Committee has stated  that aggregate demand 
conditions do not exert upside pressures on inflati on . 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
12. According to the Committee members, the impact of the measures taken in 
December to contain credit supply will be seen in t he forthcoming days. It was 
indicated that additional restrictive measures on c redit expansion, to be taken 
until the next meeting, would provide more room for  monetary policy. In this 
respect, the Committee stated that additional hikes  in required reserve ratios 
for short term liabilities would be necessary. 
13. Since the launch of inflation targeting in 2006 , the Committee has announced 
its medium-term inflation forecasts and provided a qualitative perspective 
regarding the outlook for policy rates. The current  economic climate requires 
the monetary policy to consider financial stability  along with financial stability, 
requiring the Committee to utilize a broader set of  monetary policy instruments 
including policy rates, reserve requirement ratios,  and liquidity management 
facilities. Therefore, the Committee has indicated that lower policy rate 
coupled with higher reserve requirement ratios is t he optimal policy mix under 
current conditions, in terms of upholding both fina ncial stability and price 
stability. In this respect, it was decided that the  policy rate would be reduced 
by 25 basis points. 
14. Given the mounting uncertainties concerning the  global economic outlook, 
flexibility regarding each instrument within the po licy mix would be needed. 
Therefore, the Committee agreed that the Inflation Report will provide 
forecasts for the net effect of the policy mix rath er than the direction of each 
policy instrument, and will not outline an explicit  path regarding the individual 
elements of the policy mix. 15. The Committee evaluated the forecasts to be pre sented in the January 
Inflation Report.  Inflation is expected to decline  significantly in January and 
remain below the end-year target of 5.5 percent in the first quarter, before 
displaying a volatile path starting with the second  quarter. Assuming that a 
limited monetary tightening brings credit growth ra te down to 20-25 percent in 
2011, the revised forecasts indicate that inflation  would be close to the target 
by the end of 2011. The Committee noted that the en visaged monetary 
tightening in 2011 may be executed through various combinations of different 
policy tools. It was underscored that the monetary tightening could be 
implemented by either required reserve ratios or po licy rates, or a combination 
of both. Moreover, it was stated that during the ti ghtening process, both 
instruments could move in either the same or in opp osite directions. On the 
other hand, the Committee also emphasized that the net impact of the 
measures taken—and to be taken in the future—within  the new policy 
framework, will be restrictive. 
16. The baseline scenario of the January Inflation Report envisages a gradual 
tightening by changing the mix of the policy rate a nd reserve requirement 
ratios. Such a tightening should not only aim at sl owing down credit growth 
and domestic demand, but also reduce macroprudentia l concerns. The impact 
of the monetary tightening on the credit growth is expected to be apparent 
over the near term. However, the time lag and the e xtent of the impact of the 
policy measures may vary depending on the developme nts beyond the control 
of monetary policy. Therefore, the Committee will c losely monitor the effects of 
the policy measures and take further actions should  the credit growth rate or 
the inflation rate deviate from the desired levels.    
17. Developments regarding the global economy remai n central for the domestic 
inflation and monetary policy outlook. Under curren t conditions, the Committee 
is utilizing several instruments in order to preser ve both price stability and 
financial stability. Therefore, global developments  would not only affect the 
direction of the policy instruments, but also their  mix. Accordingly, global 
developments will be assessed against their effects  on the aggregate demand 
as well as its composition.      
18. Although there has been some improvement regard ing the expectations on the 
US economy, uncertainties driven by debt sustainabi lity problems across euro 
area peripheral economies still persist. Ongoing pr oblems in credit, real estate, 
and labor markets across developed economies and th e uncertainties 
regarding the impact of fiscal consolidations conti nue to pose downside risks 
regarding the pace of global growth. The possibilit y of a longer-than-
anticipated period of anemic global growth and a lo ng period of quantitative 
easing by developed economies not only creates down side risks regarding 
external demand but also suggests that capital infl ows may continue at a faster pace. Should such a scenario materialize, a policy mix of low policy rate 
and high reserve requirement ratios may be implemen ted for a long period, 
both for balancing the domestic and external demand  and for macroprudential 
purposes. Moreover, an outcome whereby global econo mic problems intensify 
and contribute to a contraction of domestic economi c activity may require an 
easing in all policy instruments. 
19. Although downside risks are important, there ar e also upside risks regarding 
global economy, particularly driven by the lagged i mpacts of the exceptionally 
loose monetary policies implemented by the develope d economies during the 
past two years. If the global economy faces a faste r-than-expected recovery, 
global inflation may increase and thus trigger a ti ghtening in the monetary 
policies of developed economies. Materialization of  such a scenario would 
mean higher global interest rates and demand-driven  domestic inflation, and 
thus necessitate a tightening by using both policy rates and reserve 
requirements.      
20. Oil and other commodity prices have displayed r apid increases in the recent 
period. The increases in commodity prices, if they persist, exert risks regarding 
general pricing behavior, given the strong pace of domestic demand. Should 
such a risk materialize and hamper the attainment o f the medium-term inflation 
targets, there may be stronger tightening than envi saged in the baseline 
scenario.  However, the policy mix may vary dependi ng on the developments 
regarding external demand, capital flows, and the o utlook for credit growth.   
21. The Committee continues to monitor fiscal polic y developments closely while 
formulating monetary policy. Increasing government saving under current 
circumstances is essential to control the current a ccount deficit driven by the 
disparity between domestic and external demand. Our  inflation forecasts take 
the fiscal projections of the Medium Term Program ( MTP) as given. A revision 
in the monetary policy stance may be considered, sh ould the fiscal stance 
deviate significantly from this framework and conse quently have an adverse 
effect on inflation outlook. 
22. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price  stability in the period ahead. To 
this end, the impact of the macroprudential measure s taken by the Central 
Bank and other institutions on the inflation outloo k will be considered carefully. 
Strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline a nd the structural reform 
agenda would support the improvement of Turkey’s so vereign risk, and thus 
facilitate macroeconomic and price stability. Susta ining the fiscal discipline will 
also provide more flexibility for monetary policy a nd support the social welfare 
by keeping interest rates permanently at low levels . In this respect, timely 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the MTP and the 
European Union accession process remains to be of u tmost importance. 