No: 2011 – 58  
22 December 2011 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: December 22, 2011 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Turalay Kenç, Nec ati Şahin,  
M. Đbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to keep the short 
term interest rates constant at the following level s: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 5.75 per cent, 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 5 pe rcent, lending rate at 12.5 
percent, the interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via 
repo transactions at 12 percent, 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 15.5 p ercent. 
Data on the third quarter of the year confirms that  the rebalancing between the 
domestic and external demand is ongoing as envisage d. Consumption demand is 
decelerating and the contribution of net external d emand to growth is increasing. 
Accordingly, the improvement in the current account  balance is becoming more 
pronounced. 
The Committee has noted that inflation will increas e in December due to the 
base effects from unprocessed food prices. The Cent ral Bank delivered a strong 
tightening in October in order to prevent the poten tial second round effects of a 2011 
year-end inflation that will exceed the target sign ificantly. Although recent data releases 
suggest that the economic activity is stronger than  expected, domestic demand is 
expected to follow a moderate path due to monetary tightening. In fact, the slowdown in 
the consumer loan growth is becoming more pronounce d. Therefore, the Committee 
expects second round effects of the temporary price  movements to remain contained 
and inflation to fall gradually throughout 2012, co nverging to 5 percent target during the 
final months of the year. 
The Committee has indicated that tight monetary pol icy should be maintained for 
a while in order to keep inflation outlook consiste nt with the medium term targets. 
However, given the prevailing uncertainties regardi ng global economy, it would be 
appropriate to preserve the flexibility of monetary  policy. Therefore, the impact of the 
measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and  inflation expectations will be 
monitored closely and the amount of Turkish lira fu nding via one-week repo auctions will 
be timely adjusted on either direction, if needed. 
Moreover, the Committee has determined the main com ponents of the “Monetary 
and Exchange Rate Policy in 2012” document, to be p ublished on Tuesday 27 th  of 
December.  In line with the strategy formulated at the interim  meeting of August 4, 2011, the 
Committee will continue to monitor global developme nts closely and take the needed 
measures promptly to maintain the stability in the domestic financial markets.  
 It should be emphasized that any new data or infor mation may lead the 
Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
five working days. 
 