No: 2011- 12                                                                                        28  April 2011  
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: April 21, 2011 
 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. In March, consumer prices increased by 0.42 percent, while annual inflation 
fell to 3.99 percent. As anticipated in the Summary of  Monetary Policy 
Committee (the Committee) meeting, annual inflation  continued to rise in core 
goods. However, service inflation went down on base effe cts. Thus, the annual 
rate of increase in core inflation indicators remained flat month-on-month. 
2. Annual unprocessed food inflation declined to 0.56 percent. Processed food 
prices continued to trend upward in March. As stated in the summary of the 
March meeting, the temporary lifting of customs duties on wheat imports 
helped restrain the monthly price hike in bread and cereals, but rising prices of 
fats and oils brought annual processed food inflation u p to 6.39 percent. As a 
result, annual food inflation ended the first quarte r at 3.47 percent. The 
Committee has noted that annual unprocessed food infla tion is likely to 
increase in the second quarter due to base effects.  
3. Rising international oil prices and exchange rate d evelopments continued to 
put upward pressure on fuel prices in March. Thus, annu al energy inflation 
rose to 7.02 percent. Other energy items are also exp ected to reflect the 
cumulative increases in oil prices over the upcoming per iod. 
4. Prices of services increased by 0.40 percent, while ann ual services inflation 
dropped to an all-time low of 3.57 percent. The annu al rate of increase in 
restaurants and hotels decreased amid favorable food pr ices, whereas 
transport prices continued to rise due to higher fuel prices. Meanwhile, the 
base effects from communication services may lead to a sig nificant increase in 
April's annual services inflation. 
5. Annual core goods inflation (excluding food, energy,  alcoholic beverages, 
tobacco and gold) continued to rise. The annual rate of increase in clothing 
prices was slightly up, whereas the annual inflation in  other core goods, 
primarily durable goods, increased rapidly due to rising  import prices and the 
ongoing effects of the depreciating Turkish lira. The r aised customs duties on 
fabric and apparel imports are expected to affect prices of core goods in the 
second half of 2011. 6. Overall, inflation is expected to increase in the sh ort term due to the lagged 
effects of rising oil prices and base effects and remain vo latile throughout the 
year. 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
7. Recent releases suggest that the economic activity is mod erating after a 
strong print in the last quarter of 2010. Indeed, ind ustrial production, capacity 
utilization and other leading data indicate a slowdown  on a quarterly basis. In 
addition, expectations for the 3-month ahead orders si gnal that economic 
activity would continue to grow moderately in the secon d quarter.  
8. Domestic demand remains strong. The production and i mports of consumption 
and investment goods were higher during January-Febru ary than the fourth-
quarter averages. The ongoing surge in consumer confide nce and credit use 
does not point to a marked slowdown in the first quarte r's private consumption 
spending. Moreover, the investment sentiment for the next  12 months has 
stabilized at high levels. In light of these data, the  Committee has stated that 
domestic demand remained strong over the first quarter. 
9. Imports continue to increase with strong domestic deman d. The Committee 
has indicated that rising oil prices may mask the slowdown  in imports, and 
thus non-energy imports would be a more informative ind icator in assessing 
the impact of the recent policy measures. In this context , the Committee has 
noted that there was no significant slowdown in the fir st-quarter’s non-energy 
imports, and reiterated that the restrictive effects of  the policy measures on 
loans and imports would be observed with a lag.  
10. External demand displays a weaker pace. The Januar y-February export 
(excluding gold) quantity index was moderately higher th an the fourth-quarter 
average, while the flat course of the expectations on the  3-month-ahead 
orders indicates that external demand conditions are unl ikely to recover 
strongly over the short term. The fact that euro area ( Turkey's largest trading 
partner) output is still below pre-crisis levels suggests a  similar outlook. 
Highlighting the ongoing fragility across advanced eco nomies, the Committee 
has reiterated that the exports would recover slowly and  gradually. 
11. Employment conditions continue to improve, though,  unemployment rates 
remain higher than pre-crisis levels. While the recovery in non-farm 
employment continues, leading indicators for investment and employment 
show that this trend would be maintained over the comi ng months. 
Nevertheless, the Committee has maintained the view that  unemployment 
rates would remain higher than pre-crisis levels for a wh ile, containing the unit 
labor costs. Monetary Policy and Risks 
12. The Committee has assessed the forecasts prepared for the Inflation Report. 
The data for the first quarter of 2011 indicate that the economic activity, driven 
by the domestic demand, is more robust than expected. Acco rdingly, the 
Committee members have indicated that the revised foreca sts would be based 
on the assumption that aggregate demand conditions pr ovide less support for 
disinflation compared to the previous period. On the ot her hand, it was stated 
that capacity utilization rates are still below pre-crisis  levels and 
unemployment rates are above pre-crisis levels, and thus t he output gap is not 
closed as of the first quarter of 2011. However, owing to the lagged impact of 
rising oil prices as well as base effects, inflation is expe cted to display an 
increasing trend over the short term and, after hoveri ng around the target 
throughout the year, it is expected to end the year so mewhat above the target 
of 5.5 percent. 
13. The Committee has indicated that the above-target  forecast for end-2011 
inflation can be completely attributed to developments beyond the control of 
monetary policy. Accordingly, it was stated that Centr al Bank of Turkey (CBT) 
will not react to the first round effects of the increa ses in oil and other 
commodity prices. However, it was underscored that second  round effects will 
be closely monitored and a deterioration in the prici ng behavior will not be 
tolerated. 
14. The effects of the measures taken by the CBT since N ovember on credit 
volume and domestic demand are expected to be more visib le starting with the 
second quarter. However, the Committee has indicated th at raising reserve 
requirements on short term foreign exchange and Turkis h lira liabilities would 
contribute to containing macro financial risks by rebala ncing the external and 
domestic demand. In light of these assessments, in order to contain the risks 
towards price stability and financial stability, the Com mittee has decided to 
monitor the tightening impact of the implemented pol icy mix—a low policy rate, 
a wide interest corridor and high reserve requirement  ratios—and take 
additional measures along the same lines, if needed. 
15. In assessing risk factors and related monetary policy measures, current 
framework takes both price stability and financial stabi lity into account. 
Therefore, risk factors are not only assessed with respect  to their impact on 
the level but also on the composition (external versus domestic demand) of 
the aggregate demand. The level of the aggregate de mand is related to price 
stability, while its composition refers directly to financi al stability. Risk factors 
regarding global economy are also evaluated against t his backdrop. 
16. Although downside risks regarding global economy h ave decreased compared 
to the previous quarter, they are still significant. Pro blems in credit, real estate and labor markets in many advanced economies are yet t o be solved. 
Moreover, uncertainties regarding debt sustainability issues and the impact of 
fiscal consolidations persist. On the other hand, rapid i ncreases in oil prices 
may restrain the global recovery. All these factors cont inue to pose downside 
risks regarding the pace of global growth. The possibilit y of a longer-than-
anticipated period of slow global growth not only crea tes downside risks 
regarding external demand, but also suggests that short term capital inflows 
may remain strong. Should such a scenario materialize, a policy mix of low 
policy rate, high reserve requirement ratios and wid e interest rate corridor may 
be implemented for a long period. Moreover, an outco me whereby global 
economic problems intensify and contribute to a contracti on of domestic 
economic activity, may require an easing in all policy i nstruments. 
17. Although downside risks remain notable, upside risks re garding global 
economy are becoming more significant, particularly drive n by the lagged 
impacts of the exceptionally loose monetary policies impl emented by the 
developed economies. If the global economy faces a fast er-than-expected 
recovery, global inflationary pressures may arise soone r than envisaged. 
Materialization of such a scenario would mean higher po licy rates at a global 
scale and demand-driven domestic inflation, and thus nece ssitates a 
tightening by using both policy rates and reserve requi rements. 
18. The outlook for oil and other commodity prices re mains uncertain. Should the 
increases in commodity prices persist and exert risks regardi ng the general 
pricing behavior, the additional tightening may be im plemented sooner than 
implied by the baseline scenario presented in the Infl ation Report. However, 
given that higher oil prices will also worsen the curren t account balance, a 
possible policy response will consider macro-financial r isks as well. Therefore, 
the exact content of the policy mix may vary depending on the outlook for 
external demand, capital flows, and the credit growth. 
19. The CBT will continue to monitor fiscal policy deve lopments closely while 
formulating monetary policy. Our inflation forecasts i n the baseline scenario of 
the Inflation Report assume that the ratio of fiscal e xpenditures to the GDP will 
evolve as projected in the Medium Term Program (MTP). A revision in the 
monetary policy stance may be considered, should the f iscal stance deviate 
significantly from this framework and consequently have a n adverse effect on 
medium-term inflation outlook. Increasing government sa ving—thus sustaining 
fiscal discipline—under current circumstances is essential to control the 
current account deficit driven by the disparity between d omestic and external 
demand. Therefore saving the extra tax revenues driven by  the stronger than 
expected economic activity would not only reduce financia l stability risks, but 
also increase the efficiency of the new policy mix.    20. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price sta bility in the period ahead. To 
this end, the impact of the macroprudential measures ta ken by the CBT and 
other institutions on the inflation outlook will be ass essed carefully. 
Strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline and th e structural reform 
agenda in the medium term would support the improveme nt of Turkey’s 
sovereign risk, and thus facilitate macroeconomic and price  stability. 
Sustaining the fiscal discipline will also provide more f lexibility for monetary 
policy and support the social welfare by keeping inte rest rates permanently at 
low levels. In this respect, timely implementation of t he structural reforms 
envisaged by the MTP and the European Union accession p rocess remains to 
be of utmost importance. 