No: 2011 – 08           30 March 2011 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: March 23, 2011  
 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. In February, consumer prices increased by 0.73 percen t, while annual inflation 
fell to 4.16 percent, mainly due to base effects from unprocessed food prices. 
The annual rate of increase was up in prices of core go ods but slightly down in 
prices of services. As anticipated in the Summary of the February Monetary 
Policy Committee (the Committee) meeting, the annua l rate of increase in core 
inflation measures continued to rise. 
2. In the unprocessed food group, prices increased by 4 .32 percent in February, 
while inflation dropped to 2.89 percent year-on-yea r owing to base effects. In 
the processed food group, prices continued to accelerate  on soaring prices for 
bread and cereals as well as oils and fats. Although annual processed food 
inflation is expected to increase gradually in coming mon ths amid higher 
international food prices, the temporary lifting of customs duties on wheat 
imports may help to reduce this upward pressure. 
3. Developments in international oil prices and exchan ge rates continued to push 
fuel prices up in February, while annual energy infla tion eased to 6.23 percent 
on base effects.  
4. Annual services inflation edged down to 4.22 percen t in February. Annual 
inflation was down in restaurants and hotels, reflecting  lower food inflation, 
while accelerating fuel prices put further upward pr essure on transport 
services. Annual inflation in services excluding catering and transport was as 
low as 2.34 percent in February, while the annual ra te of increase in rents 
remained stable at 4 percent.  
5. Annual core goods inflation (excluding food, energy,  alcoholic beverages, 
tobacco and gold) rose by 1.31 percentage points to 3. 31 percent on higher 
import prices and the depreciation of the Turkish lira. Specifically, the increase 
in durable goods inflation was significant in February.  
6. Noting the recent run-up in seasonally adjusted cor e price measures driven by 
rapid increases in import prices, the Committee expects annual core inflation 
to continue to rise for a while.    Factors Affecting Inflation 
7. Recent releases on economic activity have been largely  consistent with the 
outlook presented in the January Inflation Report. Af ter increasing sharply in 
December, seasonally adjusted industrial production decele rated in January, 
but was still significantly higher than the fourth-quar ter average. Leading 
indicators for February and March have shown that the pace of economic 
activity slowed quarter-on-quarter, yet remained stron g.  
8. Economic activity continues to strengthen amid increasin g domestic demand. 
The production and imports of consumer goods were signifi cantly higher in 
January than the fourth-quarter averages. The ongoing  surge in consumer 
confidence and credit use does not point to a marked sl owdown in the first 
quarter's private consumption spending. Similarly, th e January rise in the 
production and imports of capital goods and the robust sa les of commercial 
vehicles during January-February suggest that the rapid recovery in private 
investments continued in the first quarter.  
9. Imports continue to increase with strong domestic deman d. The Committee 
has noted that rising oil prices may mask the slowdown in  the main trend of 
imports, and thus non-energy imports would be a more i nformative variable in 
assessing the impact of the recent policy measures. That sa id, the Committee 
has reiterated that the restrictive effects of these poli cy measures on loans 
and imports would be observed with a lag. 
10. Foreign demand remains relatively weak despite th e recent pick-up. January's 
export (excluding gold) quantity index was higher than th e fourth-quarter 
average, while leading indicators for February and Mar ch confirm the gradual 
recovery in exports. The flat course of 3-month-ahead e xpectations for new 
orders indicates that foreign demand is unlikely to reco ver strongly over the 
short term. Moreover, both the political tension in N orth Africa and the massive 
earthquake in Japan pose downside risks to the foreign dem and outlook. 
11. Employment conditions continue to improve, yet, u nemployment rates remain 
at high levels. While the recovery in the non-farm e mployment continues, both 
recent production data and survey indicators for inve stment and employment 
indicate that this trend would be maintained over the  coming months. 
Nevertheless, the Committee has reiterated that unemplo yment rates would 
remain higher than pre-crisis levels for a while, contain ing the unit labor costs. 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
12. In light of these developments, the Committee con cluded that aggregate 
demand conditions are in line with the outlook present ed in the Inflation 
Report. Both the unemployment and capacity utilization rates suggest that the output gap has not closed. In fact, unit labor costs and services prices do not 
display a noticeable acceleration. However, oil and ot her commodity prices 
hover above the Inflation Report assumptions, exerting  upward pressure on 
core goods prices. Accordingly, the Committee expects that co re goods 
inflation would continue to increase for some time, whi le services inflation 
would display a more benign path.       
13. Although the measures taken by the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) since 
November are expected to have an impact on credit volume  and domestic 
demand starting with the second quarter, some addition al increase in reserve 
requirement is deemed necessary for macroprudential pur poses. The 
measures aim at containing the macro financial risks by ind ucing a more 
balanced composition of the aggregate demand. Recently , domestic and 
export orders show a more balanced pattern, suggesting th at policy measures 
have started to become effective to some extent. However,  given the strength 
of the credit growth and other domestic demand indicato rs, the Committee 
indicated that additional monetary tightening would be necessary for 
containing macro financial risks. According to the Committe e members, 
implementing the monetary tightening through reserve requirements, rather 
than using the policy rates, would be more effective un der current conditions. 
In this respect, the CBT decided to deliver a notable hike in the weighted 
average of reserve requirements on short term liabilit ies. 
14. In this respect, the Committee noted that the deci sion on reserve requirements 
would also provide the monetary tightening required  for containing the 
potential second round effects of the recent increases in  oil and other 
commodity prices. The Committee members indicated that  this decision 
reflects the policy reaction implied through the “persi stent increases in 
commodity prices” scenario in the January Inflation Rep ort. 
15. In light of these assessments, in order to contain the  risks towards price 
stability and financial stability, the Committee has d ecided to monitor the 
tightening impact of the implemented policy mix—a low policy rate, a wide 
interest corridor and high reserve requirement ratios—an d take additional 
measures along the same lines, if needed. 
16. The Committee members have indicated that reserve  requirement is only one 
of the tools for containing credit growth and domestic d emand, and 
emphasized the importance of the supplementary macrop rudential measures 
by other related institutions. In this respect, it was stated that the direct 
measures targeting credit supply would enhance the effe ctiveness and 
efficiency of the policy implemented by the CBT.   
17. The Committee monitors the fiscal policy developmen ts closely. Budget figures 
regarding the first two months of the year suggest tha t revenues are increasing at a faster pace than envisaged in the Medium Term Prog ram (MTP), owing to 
the stronger-than-expected economic activity. The Commit tee underscored 
that saving this fiscal space would not only help to bal ance the domestic and 
external demand, but also reduce the need for the CBT  to take additional 
measures.  
18. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price sta bility in the period ahead. To 
this end, the impact of the macroprudential measures t aken by the Central 
Bank and other related institutions on the inflation o utlook will be considered 
carefully. Strengthening the commitment to fiscal discip line and the structural 
reform agenda would support the improvement of Turkey ’s sovereign risk, and 
thus facilitate macroeconomic and price stability. Sustai ning the fiscal discipline 
will also provide more flexibility for monetary polic y and support the social 
welfare by keeping interest rates permanently at low levels. In this respect, 
timely implementation of the structural reforms envisage d by the MTP and the 
European Union accession process remains to be of utmost i mportance. 