 
No: 2011 – 26            4 August 2011 
 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: August 4, 2011 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin, M. Đbrahim Turhan,  
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has de cided to set the short 
term interest rates as follows: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) has been decr eased from 6.25 percent 
to 5.75 percent, 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate has been in creased from 1.50 
percent to 5 percent, lending rate has been kept at 9 percent, the interest rate on 
borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via re po transactions has been 
kept at 8 percent, 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00  p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate has been kept at 0 percent, while lendi ng rate has been kept at 
12 percent. 
 
Concerns regarding sovereign debt problems in some Euro pean economies and 
the global growth outlook have continued to intensify,  increasing the risks highlighted in 
the July Committee meeting. In order to limit the p otential downside volatility in the 
short-term interest rates, the Committee has decided to narrow the interest rate corridor 
by significantly increasing the overnight borrowing ra te. In addition, the Committee has 
approved a technical adjustment to increase the efficien cy of the central bank liquidity 
management and to facilitate a more balanced provision  of liquidity across the system.  
Moreover, the Committee has delivered a measured poli cy rate cut to reduce the 
risk of a domestic recession that may be caused by the he ightened problems in the 
global economy. 
The Committee has agreed to closely monitor the devel opments, and if 
necessary, take measures to provide foreign exchange liqui dity via appropriate methods 
and instruments. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informati on may lead the 
Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
five working days. 