1 
 No: 2011 - 52 
November 4, 2011  
 
 
THE CENTRAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY  
PRESS RELEASE ON THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE DEPOSIT MARKET  
 
In the framework of the strategy set out at the Monetary Policy Committee 
Meeting held on 4  August 2011, it has been decided tha t, in order to enhance the 
mobility of foreign exchange liquidity in the Interbank Foreign Exchange Market,  the 
Central Bank should resume its activities as an intermediary in the foreign exchange 
deposit markets in Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets a s of 10 November 
2011, until the heightened uncertainties in the international markets disappear.  
In this context, banks shall be able to borrow and lend in the foreign exchange 
deposit market through the intermediation of the Central Bank in accordance wi th the 
rules set by the Implementation Instructions for the Foreign Exchange and Banknotes 
Markets. Guidelines for the operation of the Foreign Exchange Deposit Market are 
available in the Annex.  
  
 
 2 
 ANNEX: Guidelines for the Operation of the Foreign Exch ange Deposit Market:  
 
1. All banks that are the members of the Interbank Foreign Exchange Market 
shall be eligible to make transactions in the Foreign Exchange Deposit 
Market.  
2. Transaction limits for the Banks shall be those introduced to them at the 
Foreign E xchange and Banknotes Markets.  
3. Banks shall perform foreign exchange deposit transactions against 
collateral. The assets eligible as collaterals are the following:  
i. Foreign banknotes deposits of the banks at Ankara, İstanbul and İzmir 
Branches of the Central Bank,  
ii. Bills and bonds, the maturity structures and features of which are 
evaluated and accepted by the Central Bank and issued to foreign states 
and treasuries,  
iii. Eurobonds issued by the Undersecretariat of Treasury,  
iv. Government Domestic Debt Securities issued by the Undersecretariat of 
Treasury  
v.  Central Bank liquidity bills.  
4. Banks shall take into account the excess portion stated below according to 
the groups and tra nches determined for themselves and deposit collateral 
in the Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets accordingly.  
Collateral Types  Tranche 
1  Tranche 
2  Tranche 
3 
Foreign Banknotes Deposits  10 11 12 
Bills and Bonds Issued by Foreign States  17 20 23 
Euro bonds  20 25 30 
G.Securities / GDDS< 1 YEAR        
(TL, FX AND FX -INDEXED)  20 25 30 
G.Securities / GDDS > 1 YEAR        
(TL, FX AND FX -INDEXED)  30 35 40 
Liquidity Bills  20 25 30 
 3 
 5. In the event of a change in the value of the collaterals provided by banks  in 
return for their borrowings due to reasons such as price and exchange rate 
movements; banks, whose collaterals do not fully cover their borrowings, 
may be asked to provide additional collateral. Any failure to fulfill this 
obligation within the specifi ed time shall be deemed as a default and 
transactions of such banks shall be subject to the rules and principles 
applicable to default cases.  
6. USD and Euro deposit transactions shall be conducted between 10:00 
a.m.-12:00 p.m. and 1:00 p.m. -3:30 p.m.  
7. Trans actions with the same value date shall be conducted until 12:00 p.m. 
for Euro and 3:00 p.m. for US dollar.  
8. Banks shall submit their bids and offers via the telephone lines (0 312 507 
52 00 -23) of the Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets Division.  
9. The m inimum transaction limit is USD 1 million and Euro 1 million. 
Transactions shall be conducted in terms of 1 million and multiples.  
10. Transactions may be conducted with same day, 1 -day and spot value 
dates with maturities from 1 week to 1 month.  
11. The fractio nal part of the interest rates for the bids and offers will, on a 
yearly basis, be whole, a half (1/2), a quarter (1/4) or one -eighth (1/8) and 
any fractional numbers other than these will not be allowed. One year will 
be equivalent to 360 days in the matu rity subject to interest.  
12. The Banks shall state whether their offers or bids are dividable. The 
dividable offers or bids may be partially matched.  
13. The eligible three bids and offers will be posted on the “CBTJ” page of the 
Reuters system for the purpose of informing all banks concurrently. The 
matched transactions will be announced on the same page. The Central 
Bank will be the addressee with regard to the transactions. The Central 
Bank will be the blind broker for these transactions, in other words, the 
trading institutions will not know one another.  
14. The bids and offers that did not match by the end of the day will be 
canceled.  4 
 15. Banks shall confirm their transactions until 4:30 p.m. on the same day. 
Otherwise, the Central Bank records will be binding in case of dispute.  
16. A commission of ten percent (0.10) of the TL -equivalent of the accrued 
interest, calculated by using the reference buying exchange rates 
announced by the CBT on the previous working day will be collected from 
both the borrowing and lendin g parties for finalized deposit transactions. 
This amount shall not be less than 1 ten thousandth (0.0001) of the TL -
equivalent of the principal amount calculated likewise. However, the total 
commission to be collected from both the borrowing and the lendi ng parties 
cannot exceed half of the TL -equivalent of the accrued interest, calculated 
by using the reference buying exchange rates announced by the CBT on 
the previous working day.    
17. The amount lent by the banks in the FX deposit market shall not be 
deem ed foreign currency required reserves.  
18. The banks that fail to fulfill their obligations will be subject to sanctions 
specified in the Implementation Instructions of the Foreign Exchange and 
Banknotes Markets.  