 
No: 2011 – 45 
20 October 2011 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: October 20, 2011 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin, M. Đbrahim Turhan,  
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to adjust the short 
term interest rates as follows: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) has been ke pt at 5.75 percent, 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate has bee n kept at 5 percent while 
lending rate has been increased from 9 percent to 1 2,5 percent. Interest rate on 
borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers v ia repo transactions has been 
increased from 8 percent to 12 percent, 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate has been kept at 0 percent while len ding rate has been increased 
from 12 percent to 15,5 percent. 
 
Recent data releases suggest that the rebalancing b etween the domestic and 
external demand is ongoing as envisaged. With the c redit growth decelerating to more 
reasonable levels, the desired increase in private savings has already started to take 
place. Accordingly, the Committee has noted that th ere is a significant improvement in 
the current account balance and this trend will be more evident in the final quarter of the 
year. 
Inflation will rise significantly in the upcoming m onths due to the recent excessive 
depreciation of the Turkish lira, base effects from  unprocessed food prices and the 
recent adjustments in administered prices. The Comm ittee will not tolerate these 
developments to have an adverse impact on medium te rm inflation expectations and 
inflation outlook. In this respect, the Committee h as decided to widen the interest rate 
corridor by increasing the lending rate significant ly. 
Moreover, in line with the strategy formulated at t he interim meeting of August 4, 
2011, the Committee will continue to monitor global  developments closely and take the 
needed measures promptly to maintain the stability in the domestic financial markets.  
 It should be emphasized that any new data or infor mation may lead the 
Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
five working days. 