No: 2011 – 28                 4 August 2011
PRESS RELEASE ON AMENDMENTS RELATED TO OPEN MARKET  
REPO AUCTIONS
As is known, one-week repo auctions,  the main funding instrument of the  
Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (CBRT), have been conducted via “quantity”  
auction method since 20 May 2010, and the issues regarding the auctions were  
announced to the public in the press release of 20 May 2010. Accordingly, under the  
current circumstances, each institution may bid up to the announced auction amount  
and if the total amount of bids is less than or equal to the announced auction amount,  
all bids are allocated in their full amount. If the total amount of bids is higher than  
announced auction amount, the auction amount is distributed to the institutions via  
multiplying each institution’s total bid amount with the ratio of auction amount to total  
bid amount.         
The increases in reserve requirement ratios, which were recently started to be  
used actively, caused significant squeeze in liquidity conditions of Turkish Lira market  
in 2011. With this development, from time to time it is observed that institutions bid  
beyond their needs at the repo auctions. For instance, while the average ratio of total  
bid amount to announced auction amount was 3.3 in the period from 20 May 2010 till  
the end of the year, this ratio has increased to 7.5 in the auctions conducted so far in  
2011. Nevertheless, none of the banks’ borrowing amount has exceeded the 17  
percent of the announced auction amount in the auctions conducted since 15 April  
2011,  the  date  when  the  liquidity  conditions  in  the  market  were  considerably  
squeezed due to reserve requirement rate hikes.  
In this perspective, each institution’s bid for the repo auction is limited by 20  
percent of the announced auction amount starting from 5 August 2011  with the 
objective of ensuring, by closely monitoring all market developments, that institutions  
bid according to their needs thereby enhancing efficiency of the liquidity management  
and  facilitating  a  more  balanced  distribution  of  central  bank  liquidity  across  the  
system.  For  example,  the  maximum  bid  amount  per  institution  can  be  2  billion  
Turkish lira in a 10 billion Turkish lira auction. If the total amount of bids received in a  10 billion Turkish lira auction is assumed to be 16 billion Turkish lira, then the  
institution will be allocated for 1.25 billion Turkish lira. 
For  intra-day  repo  auctions ,  which  could  be  conducted  in  emergence  of  
liquidity shortage due to some unforeseen reasons, the 20 percent limit will not be  
valid and the bid amount of each institution will be restricted with the announced  
auction amount. The other terms related to quantity auctions will remain valid.
The CBRT will continue to provide the amount of liquidity needed by the  
market in all market conditions as before, and continue to pay attention to a more  
balanced provision of liquidity across institutions.
        