No: 2011 - 06         23 March 2011 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: March 23, 2011 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç,  
M. Đbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to keep the policy 
rates constant at the following levels: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 6.25 per cent, 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 1.50  percent, lending rate at 9 
percent, the interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via 
repo transactions at 8 percent, 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 12 per cent. 
 
Recent releases on economic activity have been cons istent with the outlook 
presented in the January Inflation Report. Economic  activity continues to strengthen 
amid increasing domestic demand, while external dem and remains relatively weak 
despite the recent pick up. Employment conditions c ontinue to improve, though, 
unemployment rates remain at high levels. However, oil and other commodity prices 
hover above the Inflation Report assumptions. Accor dingly, core goods inflation would 
continue to increase for sometime, while services i nflation is expected to display a more 
benign path.  
Although the measures taken by the Central Bank sin ce November are expected 
to have an impact on credit volume and domestic dem and starting with the second 
quarter, some additional increase in reserve requir ement is deemed necessary for 
macroprudential purposes. In this respect, the Comm ittee believes that today’s decision 
on reserve requirements also provides the monetary tightening required for containing 
the potential second round effects of the recent in creases in oil and other commodity 
prices. 
In light of these assessments, in order to contain the risks towards price stability 
and financial stability, the Committee has decided to monitor the tightening impact of the 
implemented policy mix—a low policy rate, a wide in terest corridor and high reserve 
requirement ratios—and take additional measures alo ng the same lines, if needed. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the 
Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
five working days. 