No: 2011-27                    4 August 2011 
 
 
 
THE CBRT PRESS RELEASE ON  
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE SELLING AUCTIONS   
  
 
In line with the strategic framework set out at the  Monetary Policy Meeting held on  
4 August 2011, starting from 5 August 2011, the Cen tral Bank of the Republic of 
Turkey (CBRT) decided to provide foreign exchange l iquidity to the market, through 
foreign exchange selling auctions on the days deeme d necessary.  
 
On the days when the CBRT decides to sell foreign e xchange, based on daily market 
developments, the selling amount will be announced on Reuters page CBTQ at 
11:00 a.m.. The guidelines for foreign exchange sel ling auctions are provided in the 
Annex.  
 
In the upcoming period, the CBRT will continue to c losely monitor the global risk 
appetite indicators and depending on the foreign ex change market developments, 
may make changes in the auctions with prior notice.   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
ANNEX:  Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Selling Auctions : 
 
1. Only banks authorized to operate in the Foreign Exchange and Banknotes 
Markets in the CBRT are eligible to participate in auctions. 
2. No auction will be held on days when payments sy stems are closed in the 
USA even if it is a working day in Turkey, on half- working days and on 
days when direct foreign exchange intervention by t he CBRT takes place 
prior to the start of the auction.  
3. The auction number will be posted on Reuters pag e CBTQ at 13:30 and 
the banks will submit their offers between 13:40 – 14:00.  
4. The offers will be sent via Electronic Fund Tran sfer (EFT) as before.  
5. Auctions will be held under the multiple price m ethod.  
6. The results for auctions will be posted on Reute rs page CBTQ.  
7. The minimum amount to be offered will be USD 1 m illion and multiples 
thereof. 
8. The maximum amount to be offered for the auction s by each bank will be 
limited to 20 percent of the total auction amount. 
9. Banks will not be able to change their offer amo unts and/or prices during 
the auction. 
10. In case there is more than one offer at the pri ce where the auction is 
finalized, the distribution will be made on pro-rat a basis. 
11. The banks that do not fulfill their obligations  arising from the auctions will 
be subject to the sanctions specified in the Implem entation Instructions of 
the Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets.        
 