No: 2011 - 04                                                                                        15 February 2011  
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: February  15, 2011 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Durmuş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Başçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç ,  
M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu.  
 
The Monetary Policy Com mittee (the Committee) has decided to keep the policy 
rates constant at the following levels : 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 6.25 percent , 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 1.50 p ercent , lending rate at  9 
percent , the interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via 
repo transactions at 8 percent , 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m. ): 
Borrowing rate at 0 percent , lending rate at 12 percent . 
 
Recent releases on economic activity have be en consistent with the outlook 
presented in the January  Inflation Report. Economic activity continues to recover amid 
increasing  domestic demand , while external demand  remains relatively weak  despite 
the recent pick up . Employment conditions continue to im prove, yet, unemployment 
rates remain at high lev els. Inflation is expected to further decline in February, display 
some fluctuations starting with the second quarter, and end the year at a level close to 
the January Inflation Report  forecast . 
The measures  taken by the Central Bank since November are reduc ing macro-
financial risks by leading to a more balanced growth path, mainly  through a slowdown in 
import growth. Moreover, the monetary tightening would restrain the demand side 
pressures on inflation. However, the Committee also note s that rising ene rgy and other 
commodity prices pose supply side risks on the  inflation outlook.  
In light of these assessments, in order to contain  the risks towards price stability 
and financial stability, the Committee has decided to monitor the tightening impact of the 
implemented policy  mix—a low policy rate, a wide interest corridor and high reserve 
requirement ratios —until the next meeting, and take additional measures  along the 
same line, if needed.  
It should be emphasize d that any new data or information may lead the 
Committee to revise its stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
five working days.  