No: 2011 - 17           
23 June 2011  
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: June 23, 2011 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Erdem Başçı  (Governor), Turalay Kenç , Necati Şahin, M. İbrahim Turhan, Abdullah 
Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu.  
 
The Monetary Policy Committ ee (t he Committee) has decided to keep the short 
term interest rates constant at the following levels : 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 6.25 percent , 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 1.50 p ercent , lending rate at  9 
percent , the interest rate on borrowing fa cilities provided for primary dealers via 
repo transactions at 8 percent , 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m. ): 
Borrowing rate at 0 percent , lending rate at 12 percent . 
 
Recent data releases are consistent with the outlook p resented in the Inflation 
Report. Private consumption and investment growth rates are moderat ing, while 
external demand  outlook remains weak . Employment conditions continue to improve  
with unemployment rates back to  the pre-crisis  levels.  Meanwhile , unit l abor costs 
decline  due to strong productivity gains  and low levels of capacity utilization rates 
persist due to weak external demand. However , given the lagged impact of rising import 
prices and base effects, core inflation is expected to  increase  at a mod erate pace over 
the short term . Moreover, the Committee notes that the jump in unprocessed food 
inflation  would largely reve rse in June and annual inflation would fall back to the path 
forecasted  in the Inflation Report . 
The recent  measures taken by the Ba nking Regulation and Supervision Agency 
will contribute to the rebalancing of domestic and external demand.  The Committee has  
reiterated that, owing to the measures taken so far, the current account balance will 
start to improve in the final quarter  of the  year. In light of these assessments , combined 
with the ongoing  uncertainty regarding the global economy  and the slowdown in 
domestic economic activity , the Committee has decided to maintain  the current policy 
stance . 
Overall, in order to contain  the risks  towards price stability and financial stability, 
the Committee has decided to monitor the tightening impact of the existing policy  mix 
and take additional measures  along the same lines, if needed.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the 
Committee to revise its stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
five working days.  