No: 2011 – 34           26 August 2011  
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: August 23, 2011 
 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. Consumer prices went down by 0.41 percent in Jul y, whereas annual inflation 
edged up to 6.31 percent as envisaged in the July I nflation Report. Core 
goods (excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages,  tobacco and gold) 
inflation remained flat in this period, while the s ervices inflation went up. 
Therefore, core inflation indicators continued to i ncrease. 
2. Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic bever ages declined to 7.65 percent. 
Despite the rise in vegetable and meat prices, unpr ocessed food prices 
decreased by 3.65 percent amid the decline in fruit  prices. On the processed 
food front, prices of bread, cereals and processed meat went up. Moreover, 
the rising trend in prices of fats and oils continu ed, and sugar prices posted an 
increase. Accordingly, annual processed food inflat ion rose to 8.25 percent. 
The uptrend in processed food prices is expected to  continue in August as 
well. 
3. Prices of services were up 0.74 percent, while a nnual services inflation 
increased to 5.39 percent. Prices of transport serv ices continued to increase 
due to higher fuel prices and are expected to remai n on the rise over the 
forthcoming period. While rents maintained their mo derate increase, prices of 
tour packages soared. Consequently, the underlying trend of services inflation 
posted a limited increase. 
4. The recent upward trend in annual core goods inf lation halted in July. Annual 
inflation maintained its uptrend in clothing but we nt down in durable goods 
(excluding gold). On a month-on-month basis, furnit ure prices increased, 
whereas prices of white goods declined. Meanwhile, the Monetary Policy 
Committee (the Committee) has noted that core goods  inflation may increase 
temporarily in the short term due to exchange rate pass-through. 
5. Although annual core inflation indicators contin ued to increase in July, 
seasonally adjusted monthly data pointed a decline in the recent underlying 
trend. Yet, due to exchange rate pass-through, core  inflation is expected to 
increase slightly in August. 
    
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. Recent data releases confirm the Committee’s ass essment that global 
economic activity continues to decelerate. Accordin gly, external demand 
remains weak. Core euro area economies grew at a sl ower-than-expected 
pace in the second quarter and July’s PMI data poin t to a worsening outlook. 
In addition, short and medium-term US growth foreca sts of various institutions 
have been revised downward. The Committee has state d that the global 
growth outlook is deteriorating amid recent develop ments in August. The 
Committee members have noted that, despite the comp etitiveness gains due 
to the recent exchange rate movements, global devel opments would continue 
to restrain external demand. 
7. Signals of a slowdown in economic activity are g rowing stronger. Seasonally 
adjusted industrial production data posted a month- on-month decrease of 0.9 
percent in June, recording a decline for five conse cutive months. The 
slowdown in capacity utilization since February bec ame more evident in July, 
leading to a cumulative decline of about 4 percenta ge points compared to 
January. July data on the expectations for new orde rs, which serve as a 
leading indicator, signals that manufacturing activ ity might remain weak in the 
third quarter as well. 
8. There is an ongoing slowdown in final domestic d emand since the second 
quarter. Leading indicators for August suggest that  the ongoing weakening in 
consumer confidence has become more pronounced. Mor eover, investment 
appetite has decelerated for the first time in a lo ng while. Domestic sales of 
automobiles and light commercial vehicles, which re mained below the 
previous quarter’s average in July, are expected to  decrease further amid the 
weakening Turkish lira. All these developments sign al that the slowdown in 
domestic demand may deepen.  
9. The unemployment rate hovers around pre-crisis l evels. Yet, due to the 
decline in industrial employment in May, non-farm e mployment growth slowed 
and unemployment rates posted a slight quarter-on-q uarter increase in 
seasonally adjusted terms. Leading indicators sugge st that this slowdown in 
employment would continue in the third quarter as w ell. 
 
  Monetary Policy and Risks 
10. The Committee has noted that inflation may temp orarily hover slightly above 
the levels envisaged in the July Inflation Report a nd core inflation may 
continue to rise for some time. However, due to the  slowdown in the economic activity, it is expected that the second round effe cts of exchange rate 
movements would be limited, and thus the increase i n inflation would be 
temporary. Core inflation indicators are expected t o start falling again by the 
end of the year. Moreover, inflation outlook for th e end of 2012 is seen 
consistent with the 5 percent target. 
11. According to the Committee, in an environment o f increasingly slowing 
economic activity and ongoing macro financial risks , it would not be an optimal 
response to react to temporary price movements. How ever, it was stated that 
it is important to monitor inflation expectations c losely and take the necessary 
measures if there is a deterioration in the pricing  behavior that may hamper 
the attainment of medium term targets. 
12. The slowdown in credit growth and domestic dema nd combined with the 
exchange rate movements have been contributing to t he rebalancing of 
domestic and external demand. Credit growth continu es to slow down across 
all subcategories, with the deceleration in general  purpose consumer loans 
being more pronounced. Moreover, cumulative movemen ts in the exchange 
rate would put a significant restraint on the impor t demand in the second half 
of the year. Accordingly, the Committee expects a n otable improvement in the 
current account balance in the forthcoming period. It was reiterated that 
monitoring the seasonally adjusted monthly data is more informative in 
assessing the underlying trend of the current accou nt balance. Still, the 
Committee members have highlighted the important ro le of structural 
measures that would boost productivity and increase  the saving rate, in order 
to stabilize the current account deficit at reasona ble levels in the medium to 
long term. 
13. The Committee has agreed that the measures take n at the interim meeting on 
August 4, 2011 have contained the downside risks fo r the economy for the 
time being, and thus decided to keep the policy ins truments unchanged at this 
meeting. However, given the uncertainties regarding  the global economy, it is 
important to monitor all developments closely, and to deliver the required 
policy response in a timely manner. The Committee h as also reiterated that all 
policy instruments may be eased should global econo mic problems further 
intensify and the slowdown in domestic economic act ivity becomes more 
pronounced. 
14. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price  stability while preserving 
financial stability as a supplementary objective. T o this end, the impact of the 
macroprudential measures taken by the Central Bank and other institutions on 
the inflation outlook will be assessed carefully. S trengthening the commitment 
to fiscal discipline and the structural reform agen da in the medium term would 
support the relative improvement of Turkey's sovere ign risk, and thus facilitate macroeconomic and price stability. Sustaining the f iscal discipline will also 
provide more flexibility for monetary policy and su pport the social welfare by 
keeping interest rates permanently at low levels. T herefore, addressing these 
issues in the new Medium Term Program and progressi ng with the structural 
reforms envisaged by the European Union acquis comm unautaire remains of 
utmost importance. 
 
 
 
 