No: 2011 – 01 
20 January 2011 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: January 20, 2011 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Durmu ş Yılmaz (Governor), Erdem Ba şçı, Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç,  
M. Đbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to set the short 
term interest rates as follows: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) is reduced from 6.5 percent to 6.25 
percent, 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing and lending rates are kept constant at 
1.50 percent and 9 percent, respectively. The inter est rate on borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions is kept constant at 8 percent. 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate is kept constant at 0 percent, while  lending rate is kept constant 
at 12 percent. 
Recent releases have been consistent with the outlo ok presented in the October 
Inflation Report. Economic activity continues to re cover amid strong domestic demand, 
yet, industrial capacity utilization rates remain b elow their pre-crisis levels due to weak 
external demand. Although employment conditions con tinue to improve, unemployment 
rates remain at high levels. Therefore, aggregate d emand conditions do not exert 
upside pressures on inflation. Inflation is expecte d to decline significantly in January, 
remain below the end-year target of 5.5 percent dur ing the first quarter, and reach the 
year-end target after displaying some fluctuations starting with the second quarter.  
The impact of the measures taken in December to con tain credit supply will be 
seen in the forthcoming days. Additional macroprude ntial measures to restrict credit 
expansion, to be taken before the next meeting, wil l provide more flexibility for monetary 
policy. In this respect, additional hikes in requir ed reserve ratios for short term liabilities 
will be necessary.  
In order to preserve both financial stability and p rice stability, a policy mix of a 
lower policy rate coupled with higher reserve requi rements emerges as an optimal 
policy mix under the current conditions. In this re spect, the Committee assesses that, 
the net impact of the measures taken—and to be take n in the future—will be restrictive.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the 
Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
five working days.  