 
No: 2011 - 14               25 May 2011 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: May 25, 2011 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç, M. Đbrahim Turhan, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has de cided to keep the short 
term interest rates constant at the following levels: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 6.25 perce nt, 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 1.50 pe rcent, lending rate at 9 
percent, the interest rate on borrowing facilities prov ided for primary dealers via 
repo transactions at 8 percent, 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00  p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 12 perc ent. 
Recent data releases are consistent with the outlook pre sented in the Inflation 
Report. Private consumption and investment growth rat es are moderating after a strong 
rebound in 2010, while external demand outlook remai ns weak. Employment conditions 
continue to improve and unemployment rates are approa ching the pre-crisis levels. Low 
levels of capacity utilization rates suggest that output ga p has not closed yet. However, 
owing to the lagged impact of rising import prices, inf lation is expected to increase at a 
moderate pace over the short term. Moreover, the Comm ittee notes that inflation may 
exceed the year-end target of 5.5 percent in May due t o base effects arising from 
unprocessed food prices, and follow a volatile path the reafter in line with the path 
presented in the Inflation Report. 
The effects of the tightening measures on credit growt h and domestic demand 
have become more visible in the second quarter. Howeve r, both elevated levels of 
energy and other commodity prices and a weaker extern al demand outlook postpone 
the improvement in the current account balance to the  last quarter. In light of these 
assessments and considering the uncertainty regarding the global economy, the 
Committee has indicated that it would be useful to cont inue to observe the lagged 
impacts of the measures taken so far. 
Overall, in order to contain the risks towards price sta bility and financial stability, 
the Committee has decided to monitor the tightening i mpact of the existing policy mix 
and take additional measures along the same lines, if  needed. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or informati on may lead the 
Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
five working days. 