No: 2011 – 33                            23 August 2011 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: August 23, 2011 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin, M. İbrahim Turhan,  
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to keep the short 
term interest rates constant at the following level s: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 5.75 per cent, 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 5 pe rcent, lending rate at 9 
percent, the interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via 
repo transactions at 8 percent, 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 12 per cent. 
 
Recent data releases confirm the Committee’s assess ment that global economic 
activity continues to decelerate. In addition to we ak external demand, there is an 
ongoing slowdown in the domestic demand since the s econd quarter. The slowdown in 
credit growth and domestic demand combined with the  exchange rate movements have 
been contributing to the rebalancing of domestic an d external demand. Accordingly, the 
Committee expects a notable improvement in the curr ent account balance in the 
forthcoming period. 
The Committee has noted that inflation may temporar ily hover slightly above the 
levels envisaged in the July Inflation Report and c ore inflation may continue to rise for 
some time. However, due to the slowdown in economic  activity, it is expected that the 
second round effects of exchange rate movements wou ld be limited, and thus the 
increase in inflation would be temporary. According ly, the Committee has indicated that 
inflation outlook for the end of 2012 is consistent  with the 5 percent target. 
The Committee has agreed that the measures taken at  the interim meeting on 
August 4, 2011 have contained the downside risks fo r the economy for the time being, 
and thus decided to keep the policy instruments unc hanged at this meeting. However, 
given the uncertainties regarding the global econom y, it is important to monitor all 
developments closely, and to deliver the required p olicy response in a timely manner. 
The Committee has also reiterated that all policy i nstruments may be eased should 
global economic problems further intensify and the slowdown in domestic economic 
activity becomes more pronounced. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the 
Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
five working days. 
 