 
No: 2011 – 38 
20 September 2011 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: September 20, 2011 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin, M. Đbrahim Turhan,  
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to keep the short 
term interest rates constant at the following level s: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 5.75 per cent, 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 5 pe rcent, lending rate at 9 
percent, the interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via 
repo transactions at 8 percent, 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 12 per cent. 
 
Recent data releases suggest that there will be a n otable reduction in economic 
growth in the second half of the year. External dem and remains weak, and domestic 
demand continues to slow down. The deceleration in credit growth and domestic 
demand combined with the exchange rate movements ha ve been contributing to the 
rebalancing of domestic and external demand. Accord ingly, the Committee expects a 
significant improvement in the current account bala nce in the forthcoming period. 
The Committee has noted that core inflation may con tinue to rise in the short- 
term. However, due to the slowdown in economic acti vity, it is expected that the second 
round effects of exchange rate movements would be l imited, and thus the increase in 
inflation would be temporary. Accordingly, the Comm ittee has indicated that inflation 
outlook for the end of 2012 is consistent with the 5 percent target. 
Given the uncertainties regarding the global econom y, it is now more important to 
monitor all developments closely, and to take the r equired policy measures in a timely 
manner. Therefore, the Committee has also reiterate d that all policy instruments may be 
eased should global economic problems further inten sify and the slowdown in domestic 
economic activity becomes more pronounced. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the 
Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
five working days. 