No: 2011 - 05                22 February 2011 
 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: February 15, 2011  
 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. In January, consumer prices were up 0.4 percent,  and annual inflation fell by 
1.5 percentage points to 4.9 percent mainly on the back of base effects. As 
anticipated in the summary of the January Monetary Policy Committee (the 
Committee) meeting, core inflation indicators incre ased slightly in January. 
2. Unprocessed food prices increased by 2.08 percen t month-on-month, while 
unprocessed food inflation eased to 8.05 percent ye ar-on-year. Meanwhile, 
processed food prices continued to accelerate on so aring prices for bread and 
cereals as well as oils and fats. Annual processed food inflation is expected to 
increase gradually in coming months amid higher int ernational food prices. 
However, annual food inflation is expected to drop markedly in February due 
to base effects from unprocessed food prices. 
3. Energy prices rose by 1.04 percent amid increase d fuel prices, driven by 
soaring international oil prices, and higher water supply tariffs, while annual 
energy inflation fell 3 percentage points on base e ffects. 
4. Services inflation edged slightly upwards in Feb ruary. The annual inflation 
picked up in communication services, slowed in tran sport services, hotels and 
restaurants, and remained flat in rents. The recent  increases in processed 
food and fuel prices exert cost pressure on prices of services. 
5. The annual inflation in core goods (goods exclud ing food, energy, alcoholic 
beverages, tobacco and gold) rose to 2 percent owin g to January's lower-than-
average seasonal discounts on clothing and footwear . Moreover, there has 
been some pass-through to core prices in January fr om rising import prices 
and the depreciation of the Turkish lira. Higher pr ices of services and core 
goods put upward pressure on core inflation indicat ors. Moreover, in line with 
expectations, seasonally adjusted core inflation ha s also trended up.  
    Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. Recent releases on economic activity have been c onsistent with the outlook 
presented in the January Inflation Report. Latest d ata for the fourth quarter 
confirm the Committee's expectation that the third- quarter slowdown in economic activity would be temporary. Indeed, the i ndustrial production index 
rose sharply in December both on a monthly and quar terly basis. Yet, the 
Committee has noted that manufacturing new orders s how signs of 
deceleration over the first quarter, largely due to  domestic demand. 
7. Economic activity continues to recover amid increas ing domestic demand. The 
production and imports of consumer and investment g oods were higher in the 
fourth quarter than the third-quarter average, poin ting to an acceleration in 
domestic demand, particularly for imported goods. H owever, the improvement 
in consumer confidence and investor sentiment has r ecently paused, while 
consumer loans have been slowing amid sluggish auto  loans. Against this 
background, the Committee has reiterated that the r ecent measures would 
restrain the rate of increase in loans and domestic  demand over the upcoming 
period.  
8. Foreign demand remains relatively weak despite t he recent pick-up. Although 
the export quantity index excluding gold increased quarter-on-quarter during 
the fourth quarter after declining in the third qua rter, indicators for new orders 
show no sign of a strong recovery in exports. Meanw hile, the seasonally 
adjusted imports excluding energy declined slightly  in December. The 
Committee expects import demand to slow further and  demand components to 
follow a more balanced path in coming months. 
9. Employment conditions continue to improve, yet, unemployment rates remain 
at high levels. Employment developments were consis tent with the 
Committee's expectation that the third-quarter paus e in the non-farm 
employment growth would be temporary and employment  growth would 
resume by the end of the year. Indeed, employment i n industry increased 
significantly amid strong activity. Leading indicat ors suggest that non-farm 
employment would continue to grow in coming months.  Nevertheless, the 
Committee has reiterated that unemployment rates wo uld remain higher than 
pre-crisis levels for some time, containing unit la bor costs. 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
10. The Committee expects inflation to further decl ine in February, display some 
fluctuations starting with the second quarter, and end the year at a level close 
to the January Inflation Report forecast. Especiall y, the base effects stemming 
from the unprocessed food fluctuations during the p revious year would 
continue to be important for the path of annual inf lation. Moreover, the cost-
push effects driven by the import prices may lead t o an increase in core 
inflation indicators. On the other hand, the Commit tee members indicated that 
the high level of unemployment rates compared to th e pre-crisis levels would 
contain unit labor costs.  11. The measures taken by the Central Bank since No vember are reducing 
macro-financial risks by leading to a more balanced  growth path, mainly 
through a slowdown in import growth. The Committee indicated that, in 
annualized terms, current account deficit would con tinue to widen, albeit at a 
decelerating pace, in the first quarter owing to th e base effect. Therefore, it is 
important to monitor seasonally adjusted monthly fi gures in order to assess 
the impact of the monetary measures. In fact, in se asonally adjusted terms, 
there was some improvement in the current account d eficit in December, and 
also a slight deceleration in the pace of credit gr owth was observed at the 
beginning of 2011. However, the Committee members h ave also underscored 
that available data is not long enough to make a he althy assessment, as the 
effects of the measures would be observed with some  lag. 
12. The Committee has indicated that the monetary t ightening would restrain the 
demand side pressures on inflation. In fact, leadin g indicators suggest that 
domestic orders have moderated during the first qua rter compared to the 
previous quarter. However, the Committee has also n oted that rising energy 
and other commodity prices would pose supply side r isks on the inflation 
outlook. Therefore, it was underscored that the pri cing behavior should be 
monitored closely. 
13. In light of these assessments, in order to cont ain the risks towards price 
stability and financial stability, the Committee ha s decided to closely monitor 
the tightening impact of the implemented policy mix —a low policy rate, a wide 
interest corridor and high reserve requirement rati os—until the next meeting, 
and take additional measures along the same line, i f needed. 
14. According to the Committee members, uncertainti es regarding global economy 
still persist, requiring monetary policy to be flex ible on both sides. Ongoing 
problems in credit, real estate, and labor markets across developed 
economies and the uncertainties regarding the impac t of fiscal consolidations 
continue to pose risks regarding the global economy . In this respect, the 
recovery signals coming from the US economy should be interpreted with 
caution. Moreover, it was reminded that the financi al and sovereign debt 
related problems in the euro area would persist for  a long period. On the other 
hand, it was stated that global inflation risks due  to rapidly rising commodity 
prices and lagged impacts of the monetary expansion  remain as a major 
concern. In sum, the Committee members have undersc ored that both the 
upside and downside risk factors and the related po licy responses outlined in 
the Inflation Report are still applicable. 
15. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price  stability in the period ahead. To 
this end, the impact of the macroprudential measure s taken by the Central 
Bank and other related institutions on the inflatio n outlook will be considered carefully. Strengthening the commitment to fiscal d iscipline and the structural 
reform agenda would support the improvement of Turk ey’s sovereign risk, and 
thus facilitate macroeconomic and price stability. Sustaining the fiscal 
discipline will also provide more flexibility for m onetary policy and support the 
social welfare by keeping interest rates permanentl y at low levels. In this 
respect, timely implementation of the structural re forms envisaged by the MTP 
and the European Union accession process remains to  be of utmost 
importance. 
 