 
No: 2011 - 09                                                                                               21 April 2011       
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: April 21, 2011 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Erdem Başçı  (Governor), Burhan Göklemez, Turalay Kenç , M. İbrahim Turhan, 
Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu.  
 
The Monetary Policy Committ ee (the Committ ee) has decided to keep the policy 
rates constant at the following levels : 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 6.25 percent , 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 1.50 p ercent , lending rate at  9 
percent , the interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via 
repo transactions at 8 percent , 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m. ): 
Borrowing rate at 0 percent , lending rate at 12 percent . 
 
Recent releases suggest that the economic activity is moderat ing after a strong 
print in the last quarter of 2010 . However, domestic demand remains strong, while 
external demand  displays a weaker pace . Employment conditions continue to improve, 
though , unemployment rates remain higher than the pre-crisis  levels.  
Owin g to the lagged impact  of rising oil prices  as well as base effects, i nflation is 
expected to  display an increasing trend over the short term  and, after hovering around 
the target throughout the year, it is expected to  end the year somewhat above the targe t 
of 5.5 percent . Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) will not react to the first round effects of 
the increases in oil and other commodity prices . However, second round effects will be 
closely monitored and  a deteriorat ion in the pricing behavior will not be tol erated . 
The effects of the measures taken by the C BT since November on credit volume 
and domestic demand are expected to be more visible s tarting with the second quarter . 
However, the Committee ha s indicated that raising reserve requirement s on short term 
foreign exchange  and Turkish lira liabilities  would contribute to contain ing macro 
financial risk s by rebalancing the external and domestic demand . In light of these 
assessments, in order to contain  the risks towards price stability and financial stability , 
the Committee has decided to monitor the tightening impact of the implemented policy  
mix—a low policy rate, a wide interest corridor and high reserve requirement ratios —
and take additional measures  along the same lines, if needed.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the 
Committee to revise its stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within 
five working days.  