No: 2011 – 21         21 July 2011 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: July 21, 2011 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin, M. Đbrahim Turhan,  
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to keep the short 
term interest rates constant at the following level s: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 6.25 per cent, 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 1.50  percent, lending rate at 9 
percent, the interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via 
repo transactions at 8 percent, 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 12 per cent. 
 
Recent data releases are broadly consistent with th e outlook presented in the 
April Inflation Report. Private consumption shows s igns of slowdown, investment growth 
is moderating, and external demand outlook remains weak. Employment conditions 
continue to improve with unemployment rates back to  the pre-crisis levels. Meanwhile, 
unit labor costs decline due to strong productivity  gains, and low levels of capacity 
utilization rates persist due to weak external dema nd. Although core inflation is likely 
display some upward movement over the short term, t he increase is expected to be 
limited due to the slowdown in economic activity. 
The recent measures taken by the Banking Regulation  and Supervision Agency 
and the tight fiscal stance support the policy mix implemented by the Central Bank, and 
thus contribute to the rebalancing of domestic and external demand. The Committee 
has indicated that, due to the measures taken so fa r, the domestic demand is now 
under control and reiterated that the current accou nt balance will start to improve in the 
final quarter of the year. 
In light of these assessments, combined with the he ightened uncertainty 
regarding the global economy and the slowdown in do mestic economic activity, the 
Committee has decided to maintain the current polic y mix. The Committee has also 
stated that it would be appropriate to narrow the i nterest corridor gradually should the 
sovereign debt problems regarding some European eco nomies and the concerns on 
global growth continue to have adverse impact on th e risk appetite. The Committee has 
also stated that all policy instruments may be ease d should global economic problems 
intensify and lead to a contraction in domestic eco nomic activity. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the 
Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
five working days. 