No: 2011 – 35 
12 September 2011 
 
PRESS RELEASE ON REQUIRED RESERVES, REDISCOUNT CRED IT 
IMPLEMENTATIONS  
AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE SELLING AUCTIONS 
 
     
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) at th e interim meeting on August 
4, has laid out the ground for a timely, controlled  and effective provision of liquidity to 
the market in case of a possible financial turmoil that may be triggered by global 
developments and decided the implementation of a co mprehensive package of 
measures gradually according to conditions. 
The Committee at the meeting on August 23, given th e uncertainties regarding the 
global economy, has indicated the importance of mon itoring all developments closely 
and delivering the required policy response in a ti mely manner. 
Since the last two meetings, the data announced for  the advanced economies and 
the recent developments have led to increased conce rns regarding sovereign debt 
problems in some European countries and the global growth outlook. In this context, 
not only in order to meet the Turkish lira liquidit y needs of the banking system in a 
more permanent way and lower cost, but also support  and use Central Bank's foreign 
exchange reserves timely, controlled and effectivel y, the implementation of the 
following additional measures has been decided. 
1) With the Communiqué No. 2011/10 that changes Com muniqué About Reserve 
Requirements, the facility that up to 10 percent of  reserve requirements for Turkish 
lira liabilities can be maintained in US dollar and /or euro has been provided to banks, 
being effective as of the calculation period of 16 September 2011. Therefore, a 
maximum of 3.9 billion US dollars against 6.8 billi on TL corresponding to 10 percent 
of Turkish lira reserve requirements can be maintai ned in foreign currencies as of the 
maintenance period of 30 September 2011.  
2) With the same Communiqué, gold deposit accounts,  showing a rapid increase in 
recent periods, have also been included in the cove rage of the reserve requirements. 
On the other hand, as a new flexibility provided to  the banking system, the facility of maintaining reserves requirement as "standard gold"  at the accounts of Central Bank 
against the total amount of reserve requirement mai ntained for the precious metal 
deposit accounts and up to 10 percent of   reserves  requirement for foreign currency 
liabilities excluding precious metal deposit accoun ts, has been provided.  
As of the calculation period of 14 October 2011, ab out 685 million US dollars shall 
be maintained for gold deposit accounts which becom es subject to required reserves. 
As of maintenance period of 28 October 2011, a maxi mum 2.7 billion US dollars of 
gold can be maintained in Central Bank to fulfill t he whole reserve requirement held 
against the precious metal deposit accounts and up to 10 percent of required 
reserves for foreign currency liabilities excluding  precious metal deposit accounts. 
However, considering current gold stocks of banks, 1.3 billion US dollars of gold can 
be maintained. 
3) The Regulation on Rediscount and Advance from th e Central Bank of the 
Republic of Turkey has been amended and the conditi ons of lending export 
rediscount credits provided within the framework of  this Regulation have been eased. 
In this context, the duration of fulfilling the exp ort commitment has been raised from 4 
months to 6 months. During the first eight months o f 2011 approximately 1.5 billon US 
dollars worth of export rediscount credits have bee n used from Central Bank's funds 
and the outstanding balance of these credits is 870  million US dollars. A rise in the 
demand for these credits, which has already been se en from the second half of 2011 
onwards, is expected t o a ccelerate as a result of  aforementioned easing of the 
conditions for the use of credit. Therefore the ove rall limit of export rediscount credits 
has been increased from 2.5 billion US dollars to 3  billion US dollars. These credits 
are provided in Turkish lira and their repayments a re made in foreign currency.  
Accordingly, the increase in the use of these credi ts will also result in an increase in 
Central Bank's foreign exchange reserves. 
4) Regarding the foreign exchange selling auctions,  preserving the other clauses 
announced at the press release dated August 4, 2011 , starting from today, on the 
days when the Central Bank decides to sell foreign exchange, based on daily market 
developments, the selling amount announced on Reute rs page CBTQ at 11:00 a.m. 
will be the maximum daily amount that could be sold . After receiving the offers, when 
deemed necessary, the Central Bank could sell less than the determined maximum 
selling amount for that day.    