No: 2011 - 53         
November 23, 2011  
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: November 23, 2011 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Turalay Kenç, Nec ati Şahin,  
M. Đbrahim Turhan, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to keep the short 
term interest rates constant at the following level s: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 5.75 per cent, 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 5 pe rcent, lending rate at 12.5 
percent, the interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via 
repo transactions at 12 percent, 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 15.5 p ercent. 
 
Recent data releases suggest that the rebalancing b etween the domestic and 
external demand is ongoing as envisaged. With the c redit growth decelerating to more 
reasonable levels, the desired increase in private savings has already started to take 
place. Accordingly, the improvement in the current account balance is expected to 
become more significant in the final months of the year. 
The Committee has noted that inflation will display  a rapid increase in the short-
term due to the base effects from unprocessed food prices. The Central Bank has 
delivered a strong tightening in October in order t o prevent the potential second round 
effects of a year-end inflation significantly above  the target. In this respect, domestic 
demand is expected to follow a moderate path and se cond round effects of the 
temporary price movements will be contained in the forthcoming periods. The impact of 
the measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand,  and inflation expectations will be 
monitored closely and the amount of Turkish lira fu nding via one-week repo auctions will 
be timely adjusted on both sides, if needed. 
Moreover, in line with the strategy formulated at t he interim meeting of August 4, 
2011, the Committee will continue to monitor global  developments closely and take the 
needed measures promptly to maintain the stability in the domestic financial markets.  
 It should be emphasized that any new data or infor mation may lead the 
Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
five working days. 