1R±






6HSWHPEHU


6800$5<2)7+(021(7$5<32/,&<&200,77((0((7,1*
Meeting Date: September 20, 2011



 ,QIODWLRQ'HYHORSPHQWV
1. In August, consumer prices increased by 0.73 percent, and annual inflation
went up to 6.65 percent. Due to exchange rate pass-through on core goods
prices, core inflation indicators increased as well. Meanwhile, prices of
services maintainedtheir benign course.
2. Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages group dropped to 6
percent. While unprocessed food prices went up amid the surge in vegetable
and meat prices, the annual group inflation went down to 2.98 percent due to
the base effect. In the processed food front, price hikes across sub-groups
persisted, mainly in bread and cereals besides fats and oils group. Thus,
annual processed food inflation maintained its recent uptrend climbing to 8.59
percent.
3. Prices of services edged up by 0.39 percent in August, while annual services
inflation increased to 5.68 percent. The surge in transport prices persisted
amid soaring fuel prices. The rise in processed food prices continued to affect
the prices of catering services. Mild increases in rents continued. As a result,
the impact of exchange rate movements on prices of services remained limited
to transport services and no significant change was seen in the underlying
trend of the group’s prices.
4. Annual core goods inflation rose to 6.76 percent owing to the pass-through
effect from the depreciation of the Turkish lira. This rise was particularly driven
by the developments in prices of durable goods such as automobile and
furniture. Annual inflation in clothing group maintained its rising trend.
Meanwhile, due to the protective measures taken for imports of textiles and
apparel, clothing prices are expected to accelerate in the last quarter of the
year.



 )DFWRUV$IIHFWLQJ,QIODWLRQ
5. Second quarter national accounts data offered a more favorable outlook than
the one presented in the July Inflation Report. Quarter-on-quarter economic
activity lost momentum as envisaged; however, domestic demand recorded a
less-than-expected deceleration. Meanwhile, due to the plunge in imports, the

contribution of net exports to quarterly growth turned out to be positive as
envisaged.
6. Recent data releases suggest that there will be a notable reduction in
economic growth in the second half of the year. Having contracted for five
consecutive months, industrial production in seasonally adjusted figures
recovered in July. The Committee noted that this increase in July did not
reflect the trends of the recent period marked by intensifying global
problems.Indeed,leading indicators forproduction and orders point that the
slowdown in economic activity will become more pronounced as of August.
The persistingdecline in the capacity utilization rate in the July-August period
compared to the second quarter average indicates that the slowdown in the
activity of manufacturing industry continues.
7. External demand remains weak.The downward revision of growth forecasts for
the US and the euro area points to a deteriorating outlook for the global
economy. Referring to themounting uncertainties over growth in the world
economy, the Committee noted that despite the competitiveness gains due to
the exchange rate movements, global problems would continue to restrain
external demand.
8. Final domestic demand continues to slow down.Due to the depreciation in the
Turkish lira, the demand for durable goods, particularly automobile sales, is
expected to continue to weaken. The weakcourse of consumer confidence
supports this outlook. Declining capacity utilization rates and escalating
uncertainty for demand pose a downside risk on investments. All these
developments signal that the slowdown in domestic demand will continue.



9. Seasonally-adjusted unemployment rates, which went up due to the
deceleration in employment in May, remained flat in June. During this period,
employment posted an increase in services and construction sectors, but
decreased in the industrial sector in line with expectations. Leading indicators
show that this slowdown in industrial employment will continue.

 0RQHWDU\3ROLF\DQG5LVNV

10. The Committee has noted that core inflation may continue to rise in the shortterm. It was indicated that the pass-through from exchange rates to domestic
prices would be observed especially in core goods prices. The Committee
stated that, although headline inflation will fall in September owing to the base
effect from unprocessed food prices, itmay exceed the target significantly at
the end of the year due to the pass-through effect. However, due to the
slowdown in economic activity, it is expected that the second round effects of
exchange rate movements would be limited, and thus the increase in inflation
would be temporary. Accordingly, the Committee has indicated that inflation
outlook for the end of 2012 is consistent with the 5 percent target.

11. The deceleration in credit growth and domestic demand combined with the
exchange rate movements have been contributing to the rebalancing of
domestic and external demand. Third quarter data suggest that components of
the aggregate demand evolve in the desired direction. Domestic demand
continues to decelerate and there is notable slowdown in imports. Accordingly,
the Committee expects a significant improvement in the current account
balance in the forthcoming period. However, the Committee members have
also highlighted the important role of structural measures that would increase
the productivity and the saving rate, in order to stabilize the current account
deficit at reasonable levels in the medium to long term.
12. Recently, both the worsening outlook for global economic activity and rapidly
increasing concerns on the debt sustainability in Europe has led to a sharp
deterioration in the risk appetite. Given the uncertainties regarding the global
economy, it is now more important to monitor all developments closely, and to
take the required policy measures in a timely manner. Therefore, the
Committee has also reiterated that all policy instruments may be eased should
global economic problems further intensify and the slowdown in domestic
economic activity becomes more pronounced. The Committee members
reminded that the measures taken at the August 4, 2011 interim meeting has
laid out the ground for a timely, controlled and effective provision of liquidity to
the market in case of a possible financial turmoil that may be triggered by
global developments. In this respect, it was stated that developments would be
monitored very closely and additional measures may be taken before the
regular meeting, if deemed necessary. Moreover, with reference to the risk
scenarios outlined in the Inflation Report, the Committee, has also reiterated
that all policy instruments may be eased should global economic problems
further intensify and the slowdown in domestic economic activity becomes
more pronounced.
13. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price stability while preserving
financial stability as a supplementary objective. To this end, the impact of the
macroprudential measures taken by the Central Bank and other institutions on
the inflation outlook will be assessed carefully. Strengthening the commitment
to fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda in the medium term would
support the relative improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thus facilitate
macroeconomic and price stability. Sustaining the fiscal discipline will also
provide more flexibility for monetary policy and support the social welfare by
keeping interest rates permanently at low levels. Therefore, addressing these
issues in the new Medium Term Program and progressing with the structural
reforms envisaged by the European Union acquiscommunautaire remains of
utmost importance.

