No: 2011 - 31 
8 August 2011 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: August 4, 2011 
 
  Global Developments  
1. Monetary Policy Committee (Committee) has assessed t he recent 
developments, evaluating the risk scenarios summarized in the Inflation 
Report, which were also assessed in the July, 21 st  2011 meeting.   
2. The Committee indicated that concerns regarding sover eign debt problems in 
some European economies and the global growth outlook h ave continued to 
intensify, increasing the risks highlighted in the July C ommittee meeting. 
Particularly, sovereign debt problems have spread from the peripheral 
countries of the Euro area to some core countries, and consequently, 
sovereign borrowing costs in Spain and Italy have reached  historically high 
levels. These developments have significantly increased t he uncertainties 
regarding global economy. Moreover, recent indicators o n global economic 
activity have pointed to an increasingly worsening outlo ok and have been 
significantly below expectations, speeding up the deteri oration in the risk 
appetite. 
3. Accordingly, the Committee has approved the impleme ntation of a 
comprehensive package which has been prepared by the Ce ntral Bank in 
order to contain the adverse effects of the prevailing  global problems on 
domestic markets. The Committee has emphasized that the e ffects of the 
monetary policy on the economic activity are observed wi th some lag and thus 
the timing of the decision is important.  
 
  Measures Regarding Markets 
4. In order to prepare the ground for an effective li quidity management in case of 
a further deterioration in the global risk appetite, the following measures were 
taken regarding Turkish lira and foreign exchange mark ets 
o In order to limit the potential downside volatility  in the short-term interest 
rates in case of a need for a rapid injection of liqui dity to the market, the 
Committee has decided to narrow the interest rate corr idor via 
increasing the overnight borrowing rate by 350 basis p oints. o A technical adjustment was approved to increase the ef ficiency of the 
central bank liquidity management and to facilitate a more balanced 
provision of liquidity across the system. To this end, it w as agreed that 
each participating institution’s bid for the weekly rep o auctions could be 
limited by 20percent of the total auction amount. 
o In order to mitigate the fluctuations in the repo in terest rates, it was 
agreed that the terms for maintenance period of reser ve requirements 
would be changed. Accordingly, it was approved that the  repo 
transactions that are subject to required reserves woul d be computed 
by taking the average of daily balances between two ca lculation 
periods, instead of being computed bi-weekly on Fridays.  
5. Moreover, The Committee has agreed to closely monit or the developments, 
and if necessary, take measures to provide foreign excha nge liquidity via 
appropriate methods and instruments. In this context; 
o It was approved that foreign exchange liquidity would be provided to the 
market through foreign exchange selling auctions starting from August 
5, 2011, on the days deemed necessary. 
o Along the same line, it was agreed that reserve requ irement rates on 
foreign exchange liabilities would be decreased, when necessary.  
o It was agreed that a measured cut could be exercised fo r the interest 
rates at which banks are able to borrow foreign exchang e from the 
Central Bank with one-week maturity, currently at 5.50  for USD and 
6.50 for EURO, through the Foreign Exchange Deposit M arket within 
the predetermined limits. 
6. Overall, these measures aim at laying out the groun d for a timely, controlled 
and effective provision of liquidity to the market in ca se of a possible financial 
turmoil that may be triggered by global development s. 
 
  Macroeconomic Outlook and Policy Rates 
7. It was emphasized that, the implications of existing co nditions on inflation and 
current account deficit have been already assessed thoroug hly in the 
preceding meeting of the Committee and it has been ag reed that the 
formulated policy measures would minimize the risks regar ding price and 
financial stability.  8. The Committee has indicated that both the credit volume and the domestic 
demand decelerate at a desired pace due to the measure s taken so far.In this 
respect, monthly current account balance is expected to i mprove steadily. 
9. Recently, both the worsening outlook for global ec onomic activity and rapidly 
increasing concerns on the debt sustainability in Euro pe has increased the risk 
of a renewed slowdown in the global economy. 
10. The Committee members anticipate that the deterio rating growth outlook in 
Italy and Spain, our major trade partners, could have  an adverse impact on 
external demand, whereas domestic demand would continue to moderate due 
to rising global uncertainty. Therefore, the ongoing  slowdown in the domestic 
economic activity is expected to continue in the forthco ming period.      
11. In light of these assessments, the Committee has indi cated that the probability 
of the materialization of downside risks regarding glob al economy mentioned 
in the Inflation Report has increased. Consequently, a measured policy rate 
cut was delivered, and it was agreed that necessary liqui dity support should be 
provided to the banking system.  
12. The Committee has reiterated that these measures ha ve contained the 
downside risks for our economy to a considerable extent; ho wever, given the 
existing state of the global economy, it is important t o monitor all 
developments closely, and to give the required policy response in a timely 
manner.   