 
 No: 2011 -24  
28 July 2011 
 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: July 21, 2011 
 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. In June, consumer prices decreased by 1.43 percent, a nd annual inflation 
went down to 6.24 percent. As foreseen in the summary o f the June Monetary 
Policy Committee (the Committee) meeting, this declin e was largely driven by 
the developments in unprocessed food prices due to corre ction in fresh fruit 
prices. Hence, annual inflationreverted back to thepro jected path in the April 
Inflation Report. 
2. Prices of food and nonalcoholic beverages decreased by 6.40 percent 
following the downward correction in theunprocessed fo od price index, and the 
group’s annual inflation went down by 4.48 percentag e points to 8.13 percent. 
On the processed food front, prices of fats and oilsconti nued to rise in June, 
while ongoing decreases in meat and dairy prices conta ined the increases in 
processed food prices. 
3. Prices of services rose by 0.76 percent in June, while  annual services inflation 
increased by 0.58 percentage points to 5.02 percent. Th is rise in annual 
inflation was driven by prices of tour packages.Due to l agged effects of rising 
fuelprices,the rate of increase in transport prices gai ned a slight momentum. 
Rentscontinued to rise moderately. On the other hand , seasonally adjusted 
figures indicate that prices ofservices posted a slower qu arter-on-quarter 
increase in the second quarter.  
4. Annual core goods (excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and 
gold) inflation continued to risedue to cumulative incr eases in import prices,to 
5.56 percent in June.Among durable goods (excluding g old), automobile and 
furniture prices surged, whereas prices of white goods  fell. The rate of 
increase in clothing prices continued to rise year-on-ye ar.However, seasonally 
adjusted data indicate a deceleration in the core good s inflation. 
 
5. While core inflationindicators increased in June owi ng to the developments in 
prices of services and core goods, theirunderlying trend followed a downward 
path. TheCommittee anticipates that core inflation is  likely to display some 
upward movement over the short term, but the increase  is expected to be 
limited due to the slowdown in economic activity.  
 
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. Recent data releases are broadly consistent with the  outlook presented in the 
April Inflation Report. Second-quarter data indicate a pronounced slowdown in 
economic activity. In fact, seasonally adjusted industrial production was down 
for four consecutive months since February,and materi alized below the first-
quarter average in the April-May period. Similarly,  the manufacturing industry 
capacity utilization rate, which has been declining since t he turn of the year, 
remained flat in June, pointing thatrecently economic a ctivityremains weak. 
7. Private consumption shows signs of slowdown, while inv estment growth is 
moderating. Production and imports of consumption goods remained below 
first-quarterfigures in the April-May period.Indicator s on investment demand 
suggest a deceleration as well. Meanwhile, the sales dat a also confirm the 
slowdown in domestic demand. 
8. External demand outlook remains weak. Recent data ind icate a limited 
recovery in exports for the second quarter. Both glob al PMI indices and recent 
figures for new orders suggest that external demand co nditions would remain 
weak in the third quarter. In fact, low levels of capacit y utilization rates persist 
due to weak external demand. Considering the mounting  uncertainty regarding 
the global economy, the Committee has reiterated that  exports would recover 
slowly and gradually. 
9. Employment conditions continue to improve, with une mployment rates back to 
pre-crisis levels.After the first quarter’s faster-than-e xpected growth, non-farm 
employment continued to risein April. Leading indic ators suggest that 
thisuptrend in non-farm employment would continue at a slower pace in the 
short term. The Committee has stated that,despiteimpro ved employment 
conditions, unit labor costs decreased due to strong pro ductivity gains. 
 
  Monetary Policy and Risks 
10. The Committee has indicated that, due to the mea sures taken so far, the 
domestic demand is now under control and reiterated th at the current account 
balance will start to improve in the final quarter of the year. It was stated that 
the recent measures taken by the Banking Regulation a nd Supervision 
Agency and the tight fiscal policy stance support the pol icy mix implemented 
by the Central Bank, and thus contribute to the rebal ancing of domestic and 
external demand. Although the rate of credit growth h as yet to decline to the 
levels compatible with the financial stability, the Co mmittee members expect further deceleration in the second half of the year owing to the lagged impact 
of tightening policies. 
11. In light of these assessments, combined with the hei ghtened uncertainty 
regarding the global economy and the slowdown in dome stic economic 
activity, the Committee has decided to maintain the curr ent policy mix.  
12. The Committee has also assessed the forecasts prepared  for the July Inflation 
Report. It was concluded that inflation forecast path would remain largely 
unchanged, since there has been no significant revision in the underlying 
assumptions compared to the April Inflation Report. Ne vertheless, the 
Committee members underscored that developments since the  April Inflation 
Report have increased the downside risks regarding the g lobal economy; and 
therefore, this view should be emphasized in the Infla tion Report and other 
communication documents regarding monetary policy. 
13. Problems in credit, real estate and labor markets in  advanced economies are 
yet to be solved. Moreover, concerns on fiscal dynamics in  these economies 
still persist. Especially, mounting problems regarding sov ereign debt of the 
euro area peripheral economies have increased the downsi de risks on the 
global economy. The Committee members indicated that  it would be 
appropriate to narrow the interest corridor gradually  should the sovereign debt 
problems regarding some European economies and the conce rns on global 
growth continue to have adverse impact on the risk appe tite. Moreover, the 
Committee stated that all policy instruments may be ea sed, should global 
economic problems intensify and lead to a contraction in domestic economic 
activity. 
14. Even if the debt problems in the euro area are re solved before they turn into a 
global crisis, it is still likely to experience an extend ed period of weak 
economic activity in advanced economies coupled with conti nued growth in 
emerging markets driven by domestic demand. In such a case, there may be a 
resurge in short term speculative capital inflow to em erging markets. This 
would also mean weak external demand and elevated comm odity prices, 
feeding into macro-financial risks for the domestic econo my, fueled by the 
rising capital inflows. The Committee stated that, sho uld this scenario 
materialize, low policy rates and high reserve requir ements may be preserved 
for an extended period to contain the risks against price  and financial stability. 
15. Developments in exchange rates and import prices have  been putting 
pressure on core inflation since the last quarter of 201 0. The hike in customs 
duties on fabric and apparel imports is another factor t hat could lift up the core 
inflation indicators. Under current circumstances the incr ease in core inflation 
reflects relative price movements, as the existing output ga p contains the 
second round effects of relative price movements. However,  the core inflation is expected to further increase in the forthcoming per iod, posing upside risks 
regarding inflation expectations and price setting beh avior. The Committee will 
not hesitate to tighten monetary policy, should such a risk materialize and 
threaten the achievement of medium term inflation ta rgets. The exact mix to 
be used for policy tightening in such a case will depe nd on developments 
regarding domestic demand, capital flows, current accoun t and credit growth. 
16. The Committee expects the impact of the ongoing t ightening measures on 
credit volume and domestic demand to be more significant  during the second 
half of the year. However, the extent and the timing of the impact may vary 
depending on the developments beyond the control of m onetary policy. The 
lagged effects of the policy measures on price and finan cial stability will be 
closely monitored and additional measures will be taken  if deemed necessary. 
17. The Committee will continue to monitor fiscal pol icy developments closely 
while conducting monetary policy. Sustaining the fiscal di scipline under current 
circumstances is essential to limit the risks posed by the cu rrent account 
deficit driven by the disparity between domestic and exte rnal demand. Saving 
the extra revenues acquired throughthe tax amnesty and str ong economic 
activity would not only reduce price and financial stabi lity risks, but also 
increase the efficiency of the new policy mix. In this respect, inflation forecasts 
presented in the baseline scenario of the July Inflati on Report assume that the 
extra budget revenues will be saved to a large extent.  A revision in the 
monetary policy stance may be considered, should the f iscal stance deviate 
significantly from this framework and consequently have a n adverse effect on 
the medium-term inflation outlook. 
18. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price sta bility while preserving 
financial stability as a supplementary objective. To this end, the impact of the 
macroprudential measures taken by the Central Bank and other institutions on 
the inflation outlook will be assessed carefully. Stren gthening the commitment 
to fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda in the medium term would 
support the relative improvement of Turkey’s sovereign ri sk, and thus facilitate 
macroeconomic and price stability. Sustaining the fiscal d iscipline will also 
provide more flexibility for monetary policy and suppor t the social welfare by 
keeping interest rates permanently at low levels. In thi s respect, timely 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by th e Medium Term 
Program and the European Union acquis communautaire r emains to be of 
utmost importance. 