 
 
No: 2011 – 16 
1 June 2011  
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: May 25, 2011 
 
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. In April, consumer prices increased by 0.87 perc ent, and annual inflation rose 
to 4.26 percent. This increase in annual inflation reflects the lagged effects of 
import prices and the base effect from communicatio n services. Therefore, 
core inflation indicators remained on the rise as e xpected.  
2. Unprocessed food prices continued to support dis inflation in April. Annual 
unprocessed food inflation fell to -0.83 percent in  April from as high as 31.28 
percent in October 2010. Meanwhile, annual processe d food inflation 
remained flat. Thus, annual food inflation continue d to fall in April, hitting an 
all-time low of 2.83 percent. However, rising fruit  prices and base effects may 
put significant upward pressure on May's food infla tion.  
3. Energy prices continued to rise amid high intern ational oil prices, bringing 
annual energy inflation up to 7.79 percent. Cumulat ive increases in oil prices 
are expected to pass-through other energy items ove r the second half of this 
year. 
4. Services inflation remained moderate in April. Y et, as stated in the monthly 
price bulletin for March, annual services inflation  increased due to base effects 
from communication services. Transport prices conti nued to rise slightly amid 
higher fuel prices, while the annual rate of increa se in restaurants and hotels 
declined further, by a total of 2.5 percentage poin ts in the first four months. 
Thus, services inflation continued to slow in seaso nally adjusted terms. 
5. Annual core goods (excluding food, energy, alcoh olic beverages, tobacco and 
gold) inflation continues to surge on rising prices  of imported goods. Among 
durable goods, prices of white goods increased at a  slower rate, whereas 
furniture and automobile prices rose sharply. 
   Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. Recent data releases on economic activity are co nsistent with the outlook 
presented in the Inflation Report. Despite slowing quarter-on-quarter, industrial 
production remained robust in the first quarter of 2011. Recent capacity and 
production indicators also point to a slowdown in s econd-quarter economic 
activity. 
7. Private consumption and investment growth rates are moderating after a 
strong rebound in 2010. Production and imports data  for consumption and 
investment goods confirm the first quarter's strong  domestic demand. 
However, leading indicators for the second quarter such as domestic sales of 
automobiles, commercial vehicles and white goods as  well as consumption 
indices are down quarter-on-quarter. Moreover, expe ctations for domestic 
orders also signal a slowdown in domestic demand. 
8. External demand outlook remains weak. While the first quarter's non-gold 
export quantity index was slightly lower than the f ourth-quarter average, 
leading indicators point to a moderate recovery in exports for the second 
quarter. Consideringthe recently mounting uncertain ty about the global 
economy, the Committee has emphasized that downside  risks to external 
demand remain. In this regard, the Committee has re iterated that exports 
would recover slowly and gradually. 
9. Employment conditions continue to improve and un employment rates are 
approaching the pre-crisis levels. Employment grew at a stronger-than-
expected pace in the first quarter. Leading indicat ors suggest that this uptrend 
would continue in the short term, albeit at a slowe r rate. The Committee has 
stated that the improved employment conditions supp ort domestic demand, 
but have yet to exert upward pressure on unit labor  costs.  
 
  Monetary Policy and the Risks 
10. The Committee members drew attention to capacit y utilization rates in the 
manufacturing industry which have remained at low l evels and stated that total 
demand outlook has not reached levels to put upward  pressure on inflation. 
Benign course of services inflation supports the ca se against overheating. 
However, owing to the lagged impact of cumulative r ising import prices, 
moderate increase in core inflation is expected to continue over the short term.  
11. The Committee members reiterated that last year ’s sharp fluctuations in food 
prices will lead to a volatility in headline inflat ion in the period ahead. In this 
respect, the Committee noted that inflation may exc eed the year-end target of 
5.5 percent in May due to base effects arising from  unprocessed food prices, and follow a volatile course thereafter in line wit h the path presented in the 
Inflation Report. 
12. The effects of the tightening measures on credi t growth and domestic demand 
have become visible in the second quarter. Recent d ata suggest that the pace 
of credit growth has been moderating. Moreover, non -energy imports, which 
displayed a strong print in the first quarter, are expected to follow a more 
benign path starting with the second quarter. Moreo ver, orders and sales data 
along with confidence indicators also signal some s lowdown in domestic 
demand growth. 
13. Despite the slowdown in domestic demand growth,  developments in external 
demand and energy prices since the beginning of the  year have been 
postponing the improvement in the current account. Political uncertainties in 
the North Africa have not only led to higher import  bill through elevated energy 
prices,but also restrained the recovery in exports.  Moreover, heightened 
concerns regarding debt sustainability in some euro  area countries have 
increased the downside risks for the European econo my—our major trading 
partner. Overall, the Committee indicated that both  elevated levels of energy 
and other commodity prices and a weaker external de mand outlook postpone 
the improvement in the current account balance to t he last quarter. 
14. In light of these assessments, considering the uncertainty regarding the global 
economy, the Committee has indicated that it would be useful to continue to 
observe the lagged impacts of the measures taken so  far. 
15. According to the Committee members, it would be  appropriate to remain 
flexible regarding the exact content of the policy mix, given the high level of 
uncertainty arising from the global economic condit ions. In this respect, it was 
stated that the risk scenarios outlined in the Infl ation Report continue to be 
relevant. Therefore, in order to contain the risks towards price stability and 
financial stability, the Committee has decided to m onitor the tightening impact 
of the existing policy mix and take additional meas ures along the same lines, if 
needed. 
16. The meeting also included an evaluation of the course of capital inflows and 
foreign exchange purchase auctions. The Committee m embers highlighted the 
relative weakness in capital flows to emerging mark ets due to heightened 
concerns regarding debt sustainability problems in some euroarea countries, 
and stated that it might be useful to revise the am ount purchased via daily 
auctions. It was indicated that the auction amount could be reduced gradually 
should the weakening in capital flows persist, whic h, in turn, could ease the 
need for further hikes in reserve requirements by r educing the liquidity injected 
to the market through foreign exchange purchases. S imilarly, measures to be 
taken in the forthcoming period by other institutio ns in collaboration with the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) would also reduce the need for additional hikes 
in reserve requirement ratios. 
17. The CBT will continue to monitor fiscal policy developments closely while 
formulating monetary policy. Increasing government saving—thus sustaining 
fiscal discipline—under current circumstances is es sential to control the 
current account deficit driven by the disparity bet ween domestic and external 
demand. Therefore saving the extra tax revenues dri ven by the stronger-than-
expected economic activity would not only reduce fi nancial stability risks, but 
also increase the efficiency of the new policy mix.   
18. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price  stability while preserving 
financial stability as a supplementary objective. T o this end, the impact of the 
macroprudential measures taken by the CBT and other  institutions on the 
inflation outlook will be assessed carefully. Stren gthening the commitment to 
fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda in the medium term would 
support the improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk,  and thus facilitate 
macroeconomic and price stability. Sustaining the f iscal discipline will also 
provide more flexibility for monetary policy and su pport the social welfare by 
keeping interest rates permanently at low levels. I n this respect, timely 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term 
Program and the European Union accession process re mains to be of utmost 
importance. 
 
  
 