 
 
No: 2011 – 62                 29 December 2011  
                                                                                       
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date:  December 22, 2011  
 
    
  Inflation Developments  
1. In November, consumer prices were up 1.73 percent and annual inflation rose by 
1.8 percentage points to 9.48 percent. The contribution of food prices to annual 
inflation increased significantly amid the reversing base effects from unprocessed 
food prices. Core goods inflation continued to rise parallel to the exchange rate 
movements. While the prices of services maintained a relatively moderate course, 
changes in administered prices continued to feed into inflation in November.  
2. The Monetary Policy Committee  (the Committee) noted that inflation would 
increase in December due to the base effects from unprocessed food prices. 
Prices of food and alcoholic beverages increased by 3.27 percent in November, 
and annual inflation in this group went up by 5.4 percentag e points to 7.11 
percent. As also stated in the Summary of the November Meeting, this rise mainly 
stems from the base effect from unprocessed food prices. However, it should be 
also noted that in the unprocessed food group, prices of fruits and vegetables 
posted larger increases than the previous periods. Moreover, annual inflation in 
processed food mounted to 9.44 percent owing to the cost factors. Annual food 
inflation is projected to surge in  December owing to unprocessed food prices.  
3. Administered prices went up due to the adjustments in energy prices and tax 
hikes especially in tobacco products in October. As foreseen, these tax 
adjustments were influential also in November and contributed to  annual inflation 
by 0.2 percentage point s. Hence, the total contribution of adjustments in 
administered prices to annual inflation became approximately 1.6 percentage 
points within the last two months.  
4. Prices of services rose by 0.37 percent in November, and annual services 
inflation remained unchanged. Despite the rise in annual rate of increase in the 
prices of services excluding transport and catering, seasonally adjusted price and 
diffusion indices indicate that the benign trend is maintained in the pr ices of 
services.  5. Annual core goods inflation rose approximately by 1 percentage point to 9.8 
percent in November. Pass -through from depreciation of the Turkish lira is still 
affecting the prices of durable goods. Meanwhile, amid the hikes in import duties  
on textiles and ready -wear, seasonally adjusted clothing inflation went up in this 
period. Thus, core inflation indicators displayed an increase both on an annual 
basis and in seasonally adjusted monthly terms in November.  
Factors Affecting Inflation  
6. The Committee asses sed that economic activity was robust and underlined the 
necessity to contain domestic demand considering  the inflation outlook. Recent 
indicators signal  that the economic activ ity remain s robust in the last quarter as 
well. While i ndustrial production surged in October, capacity utilization rate 
maintained its uptrend in November. Meanwhile, l abor market developments point 
to a strong course in non-industrial sectors as well. Unemployment rates 
continued to fall in line with  non-farm emplo yment developments in September. 
Moreover, sectors like construction and services, relatively less sensitive sectors 
to external developments, stood out with their  high contribution s to the rise in 
employment . 
7. The Committee highlighted the  robust course of the demand for goods and 
services, mostly determined by  current income , therefore employment conditions , 
notwithstanding the signals for a slowdown in durables and investment goods, 
which are more sens itive to exchange rates and fin ancing conditions. Meanwhile, 
the additional measures taken towards  monetary tightening in October coupled 
with the ongoing global problems are expected to contain credit facility and the 
domestic -demand -side pressures . In fact, the slowdown in the consumer loan 
growth is becoming more pronounced.   
8. External demand remains weak. Amid the recently aggravated problems 
regarding the euro area,  mediu m-term growth forecasts for the global economy 
have been revised downwards . The  global outlook for 2012  points to a slowdown 
in almost all  economies. Thus, the Committee underlined that global problems 
would continue to restrain foreign demand notwithstanding the improved market 
diversification and enhanced competitiveness provided by exchange rate 
movements . It was  also stated that while foreign demand remains subdued, 
containing effects of the ongoing slowdown in domestic demand and the 
cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira on imports has become obvious.  In this 
context, it was highlig hted that the improvement in the current account balance 
would become more pronounced  through the end of the year.  
 
Risk s and Monetary Policy  
9. Data on the third quarter of the year confirm that the rebalancing between the 
domestic and external demand is ongo ing as envisaged. Final domestic demand is decelerating and the contribution of net external demand to growth is 
increasing. Accordingly, the improvement in the current account balance is 
becoming more pronounced. The Committee has indicated that the corre ction in 
the current account balance is more evident in seasonally adjusted data and this 
trend will be reflected shortly in the annualized series.  
10. The Central Bank delivered a strong tightening in October in order to prevent the 
potential second round effects of 2011 year -end inflation that will exceed the 
target significantly. Shorter end of the market yield curve has shifted upwards 
suggest ing that monetary stance  is tight . Moreover, loan rates have increased 
after the tightening. Although recent data releases suggest that the economic 
activity is stronger than expected, domestic demand is expected to follow a 
moderate path due to monetary tightenin g. In fact, the slowdown in the consumer 
loan growth is becoming more pronounced. Therefore, the Committee expects 
second round effects of the temporary price movements to remain contained and 
inflation to fall gradually throughout 2012, converging to 5 pe rcent target during 
the final months of the year.  
11. The Committee believes that medium term inflationary pressures are contained 
through the measures taken; yet the pricing behavior and inflation expectations 
should be closely monitored given the current hig h levels of inflation. Inflation is 
likely to  stay at high levels during the first few months of 2012 due to exchange 
rate pas s-through, administered price hikes and adverse developments in 
unprocessed food prices. In this respect, the Committee has indica ted that tight 
monetary policy should be maintained for a while in order to keep inflation outlook 
consistent with the medium term targets. However, given the prevailing 
uncertainties regarding global economy, it would be appropriate to preserve the 
flexib ility of monetary policy. Therefore, the impact of the measures undertaken 
on credit, domestic demand, and inflation expectations will be monitored closely 
and the amount of Turkish lira funding via one -week repo auctions will be timely 
adjusted on either direction, if needed.  
12. Moreover, the Committee has determined the main components of the “Monetary 
and Exchange Rate Policy in 2012” document, which was published on Tuesday , 
December 27. The Committee has indicated that the flexibility provided by the 
interest rate corridor system has been alleviating the adverse effects of the capital 
flow volatility on the domestic economy. However, the Committe e has also noted 
that it would be useful to increase the predictability , conditional on the 
developments in the global economy . Accordingly, the Committee has decided to 
announce some arrangements regarding the Turkish lira and foreign exchange 
liquidity management  prior to the press meeting on December 27.  
13. In line with the strategy formulated at the interim meeting of August 4, 2011, the 
Committee will continue to monitor global developments closely and take the needed measures promptly to maintain the stability in the domestic financial 
markets.  
14. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price stability while  preserving financial 
stability as a supplementary objective. To this end, the impact of the 
macroprudential measures taken by the CBRT and other institutions on the 
inflation outlook will be assessed carefully. Maintenance of the fiscal discipline 
and strengthening the commitment to structural reform agenda in the medium 
term would support the relative improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thus 
facilitate macroeconomic and price stability. Sustaining the fiscal discipline will 
also provide more flexi bility for monetary policy and support the social welfare by 
keeping long term interest rates permanently at low levels. In this respect, timely 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the new Medium Term 
Program remains to be of utmost impor tance.  
 