No: 2011 -19
30 June 2011
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING
Meeting Date: June 23, 2011

Inflation Developments
1. In May, consumer prices were up 2.42 percent, while annual inflation rose by
about 3 percentage points to 7.17 percent. This increase was largely driven by
the spike in fresh fruit prices due to seasonal variations. On the other hand,
the annual rate of increase in core inflation indicators edged up slightly monthon-month as expected.
2. The summary of the May meeting stated that soaring fruit prices could put
significant upward pressure on unprocessed food inflation. Indeed, the fruit
price index rose by a stronger-than-expected 76.12 percent month-on-month,
as some goods entered May's index at very high prices due to supply side
developments. The Committee has noted that this jump in unprocessed food
inflation would largely reverse in June and annual inflation would fall back to
the forecasted path in the Inflation Report.
3. Annual services inflation increased slightly to 4.44 percent due to base effects.
Developments across subcategories do not suggest any upward pressure on
services inflation. In fact, recent seasonally adjusted figures indicate that
services inflation maintains its moderate pace.
4. Annual core goods (excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and
gold) inflation continues to rise. Seasonal increases in clothing prices were
higher than the previous year, whereas, among durable goods, furniture and
automobile prices decelerated and prices of white goods fell, reversing the
upsurge in previous months.
5. Although core inflation indicators increased in annual terms in May due to
developments in services and core goods, their underlying trend implied by the
seasonally adjusted figures appears to have slowed.

Factors Affecting Inflation
6. Recent data releases are consistent with the outlook presented in the Inflation
Report. After a robust first quarter fueled by strong domestic demand,
economic activity slowed in the second quarter. Indeed, industrial production
dropped month-on-month for three consecutive months during February-April,
dipping below the first quarter's average in April. The Committee has noted
that the slowdown in sectors sensitive to external demand has been more
pronounced.
7. Private consumption and investment growth rates are moderating. The strong
growth in private demand decelerated in the second quarter. April's production
and imports of consumer goods and production of capital goods were down
from the first quarter. April-May sales data also confirm the slowdown in
private demand.
8. External demand outlook remains weak. Recent data point to a limited
recovery in exports for the second quarter. The flat course of 3-month ahead
expectations for new orders signals that external demand conditions are
unlikely to improve significantly over the short term. Considering the mounting
uncertainty about the global economy, the Committee has emphasized that
downside risks to external demand have increased. In this regard, the
Committee has reiterated that exports would recover slowly and gradually.
9. Employment conditions continue to improve, with unemployment rates having
returned to pre-crisis levels. The first quarter's faster-than-expected
employment growth continued into March, albeit at a slower rate. Leading
indicators suggest that this uptrend would continue at a slower pace in the
short term. The Committee has stated that improved employment conditions
support domestic demand, yet unit labor costs decline due to strong
productivity gains.
Monetary Policy and the Risks
10. The Committee reiterated its view that aggregate demand conditions do not
indicate an overheating. Recently, domestic demand moderates while low
levels of capacity utilization rates persist due to weak external demand. Orders
and sales data as well as confidence indices confirm the slowdown in the pace
of domestic demand growth during the second quarter.
11. Given the lagged impact of rising import prices and base effects, core inflation
is expected to increase at a moderate pace over the short term. The
Committee members have underscored that this increase reflects a relative

price adjustment of tradable goods rather than a deterioration in the overall
pricing behavior; and thus, second round effects are not observed yet.
12. The recent measures taken by the Banking Regulation and Supervision
Agency towards consumer loans will contribute to the rebalancing of domestic
and external demand through controlling the fast credit growth. These
measures also reduce the need for additional hikes in reserve requirement
ratios. The Committee has reiterated that, owing to the measures taken since
last November, the current account balance will start to improve in the final
quarter of the year.
13. According to the Committee members, it would be appropriate to remain
flexible regarding the exact content of the policy mix, given the high level of
uncertainty arising from the global economic conditions. Although fragilities in
the global economy are of particular concern, the main risk scenarios outlined
in the Inflation Report continue to be relevant.
14. In light of these assessments, combined with the considerations about the
ongoing uncertainty regarding the global economy and the slowdown in
domestic economic activity, the Committee has decided to maintain the
current policy stance. In order to contain the risks towards price stability and
financial stability, the Committee has decided to monitor the tightening impact
of the existing policy mix and take additional measures along the same lines, if
needed.
15. The meeting also included an evaluation of the course of capital inflows and
foreign exchange purchase auctions. The Committee members highlighted the
persistence of relative weakness in capital flows towards emerging markets
that is due to heightened concerns regarding debt sustainability problems in
some euro area countries, and stated that, depending on circumstances, it
might be useful to further revise the amount of foreign exchange purchases via
daily auctions. It was reminded that the auction amount could continue to be
reduced gradually should the weakening in capital flows persist. The
Committee reiterated that, such a development would lower the liquidity
injected into the market and thus ease the need for further hikes in reserve
requirements to curb credit growth in the second half of 2011.
16. The CBT will continue to monitor fiscal policy developments closely while
formulating the monetary policy. Increasing government saving—thus
sustaining fiscal discipline—under current circumstances is essential to control
the current account deficit driven by the disparity between domestic and
external demand. Therefore saving the extra tax revenues driven by the
stronger-than-expected economic activity would not only reduce the risks
against price stability and financial stability, but also increase the efficiency of
the implemented policy mix.

17. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price stability while preserving
financial stability as a supplementary objective. To this end, the impact of the
macroprudential measures taken by the CBT and other institutions on the
inflation outlook will be assessed carefully. Strengthening the commitment to
fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda in the medium term would
support the relative improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thus facilitate
macroeconomic and price stability. Sustaining the fiscal discipline will also
provide more flexibility for monetary policy and support the social welfare by
keeping interest rates permanently at low levels. In this respect, timely
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term
Program and the European Union acquis communautaire remains to be of
utmost importance.

