No: 2012 -43       Release Date: September  18,  2012  
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: September 18 , 2012 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Erdem Başçı  (Governor), Ahmet  Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin, 
Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu  
 
The Monetary Policy Commi ttee (the Committee) has decided to adjust the short term 
interest rates as follows:  
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) has been kept at 5.75 percent.  
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate has been kept at 5 percent while lending 
rate has been cut fro m 11.5 percent to 10 percent. Interest rate on borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions has been cut from 1 1 percent to 9.5 
percent.  
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing 
rate has bee n kept at 0 percent while lending rate has been cut from 1 4.5 percent to 13 
percent.  
Recent data confirm th at the r ebalancing between the domestic and external demand 
continues as envisaged. As of the third quarter, d omestic  demand  follows  a mode rate pace,  
while e xports continue to increase despite the weakening global outlook . Overall , aggregate 
demand conditions support disinflation  and current account deficit  continues to improve 
gradually . 
The Committee  expects the fall in inflation to become more evide nt during the last 
quarter  of the year . However, given the recent increases in energy prices and given that inflation 
will continue to stay above the target for some time, a cautious stance regarding prici ng 
behavior is warranted .  
Although the risk appeti te has improved in financial markets  due to recent 
developments , ongoing  uncertainties regarding the global economy  necessitate the monetary 
policy to remain flexibl e on both sides . Therefore, the impact of the measures undertaken on 
credit, domestic deman d, and inflation expectations will be monitored closely and the funding 
amount will be adjusted in either direction, as needed.  
The Committee has stated that increasing the reserve option coefficient s and narrowing 
the interest rate corridor would support financial stability.  If deemed necessary, a  measured step 
in the same direction may be taken in the forthcoming period.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to 
revise its stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five 
working days.  