 
No: 2012 – 14            
                                                                       Release Date: 27 March 2012  
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: March 27, 2012 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Turalay Kenç, Nec ati Şahin, Abdullah 
Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to keep the short 
term interest rates constant at the following level s: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 5.75 per cent, 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 5 pe rcent, lending rate at 11.5 
percent, the interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via 
repo transactions at 11 percent, 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 14.5 p ercent. 
 
Recent data confirm that the rebalancing between th e domestic and external 
demand continues as envisaged. While consumption de mand shows a significant 
slowdown in the first quarter, leading indicators s uggest a modest recovery for the 
second quarter. Exports continue to grow at a stead y pace. Accordingly, despite the 
elevated oil prices, the improvement in the current  account balance is expected to 
continue in the forthcoming period. 
Inflation developments are in line with the path pr ojected in the January Inflation 
Report. Yet, the Central Bank has implemented a new  round of additional monetary 
tightening in order to eliminate the impact of rece nt cost developments on inflation 
expectations. Factors affecting inflation will be c losely monitored in the forthcoming 
period and additional monetary tightening will be r epeated, when necessary. 
Taking the liquidity projections into account, the ranges for weekly and monthly 
Turkish lira funding have been revised. In addition , certain revisions regarding the 
fraction of required reserves that can be held in g old have been approved.  
Given the prevailing uncertainties regarding the gl obal economy, it would be 
appropriate to preserve the flexibility of the mone tary policy. Therefore, the impact of the 
measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and  inflation expectations will be 
monitored closely and the funding amount will be ad justed in either direction, as 
needed. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the 
Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
five working days. 