 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date : 18 October  2012  
 
Inflation Developments  
1. In September , consumer prices were up by 1.03 percent  and annual inflation 
climbed to 9.19 percent mainly owing to energy and unprocessed food prices. 
Core inflation indicators remained on a  favorable track . Effects of the  hikes in 
administered prices and tax adjustments were partially seen  in September, 
whereas, the greater part  thereof will be evident in October . 
2. On the food and non-alcoholic beverages  front, annual inflation went up to 10.39 
percent. Despite pacing down,  seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices 
continued to rise in September, pushing the group’s annual inflation upwards. 
However, leading indicators point out that  in October  annual unprocessed food 
inflation will plummet due to vegetable  prices . As for  the processed food group, 
bread and cereals group prices registered increases , and the rise in wheat prices 
also reflected on other cereals excluding bread  as well . Owing to the base effect, 
annual processed food inflation continued to taper off  in this period ; while leading 
indicators suggest that the trend of high -rated monthly increase in processed food 
prices may continue in October as well.  
3. Energy prices went up  by 2.43 percent in September parallel to the rise in fuel 
and bottled gas prices , which was due to soaring oil prices . This upsurge  was also 
attribut ed to the raised amount of lump sum special consumption tax on fueloil . 
However, as the tax arrangement was enforced on September 22, the greater 
part of the mentioned effect on inflation will be seen in October  inflation . Energy 
prices will soar in October due to the adjustment  in natural gas and electricity 
tariffs  as well . These hikes and tax arrangements are projected to have a direct 
effect o f 0.8 percentage points on annual inflation  in October . 
4. On the services front, annual inflation has been flat since May. Annual inflation 
increased in restaurant -hotel and communication services, yet declined in 
transport services and rents in September. Upon  the arrangement introduced to 
university tuition rat es, prices of education services posted a monthly decline  by 
1.19 percent in this period.  In September , the diffusion index of the prices of 
services edged up;  however the underlying trend of seasonally -adjusted prices 
remained on a mild track .  
5. Annual inflation in core goods group fell by 1 percentage point  in September . 
Annual inflation in all core goods excluding t he clothing group  recorded 
decreas es. The decline particularly in durable goods inflation is worth noting .  
6. As a result, parallel to the su pport given by aggregate demand conditions to 
inflation and the  favorable course of cost factors , the slowdown in the underlying 
trend of core inflation indicators continued. The favorable course of unprocessed No: 2012 – 51 Release Date: 24  October 2012  food prices compared to past years will also bolster the downtrend in annual 
inflation  in the short term . Against this background, the Monetary Policy 
Committee (the Committee) expects the fall in inflation to become more evident 
during the last quarter of the year.  
 
Factors Affecting Inflation  
7. Final  domestic demand follows a moderate pace. The sharp fall in industrial 
production in August can be attributed to sector -specific day -offs other than 
official holidays in some manufacturing sectors. In this context, the Committee 
assessed that the August pr oduction data are consistent with the mild growth 
outlook.  
8. Recent data releases point to a modest rise in economic activity in the third 
quarter. Sales of automobile and light commercial vehicles posted a pronounced 
increase in the third quarter, while tho se of heavy commercial vehicles exhibited a 
weaker quarterly outlook despite the increase in September. Sales of white goods 
displayed a virtually flat course, whereas CNBC -e consumption index suggests a 
limited rise on a quarterly basis. Driven both by domestic and external market 
orders, three -month ahead expectations for orders of the manufa cturing industry 
firms have increased for the last three months, while the capacity utilization rate 
remained flat. On the other hand, the Committee stated that the deceleration in 
consumer and investor confidence and the investment tendency data in the th ird 
quarter posed a downside risk on the economic activity.  
9. The rebalancing between the domestic and external demand continues as 
envisaged . While imports continue to decline on an annual basis upon relative 
price movements besides the slowdown in credit g rowth,  exports continue to 
increase despite the weakening global outlook.  Overall, aggregate demand 
conditions support disinflation and 12-month cumulative  current account deficit 
continues to decline gradually.  
10. Unemployment rate went up due to the decline  in non -farm employment in July, 
which is attributed to the construction and services sectors. Having exhibited a 
poor outlook since the April period, employment in the industrial sector remained 
flat in this period as well. Leading indicators for the indu strial employment signal 
for a deceleration in the pace of employment in the third quarter, while other 
indicators for the labor market point to a sta ble outlook in general , albeit a slight 
deterioration in the August -September period. Nevertheless, uncert ainties 
regarding the global economy remain to be critical factors that may restrain the 
rise in employment.  
Monetary Policy and Risks  
11. The Committee has stated that increasing the reserve option coefficients and 
narrowing the interest rate corridor by a measured amount would support financial 
stability. If deemed necessary, a measured step in the same direction may be 
taken in the forthcoming period.  
12. The meeting also included an assessment of inflation forecasts to prepared for 
the Inflation Report. The C ommittee expects the fall in inflation to become more evident during the last quarter of the year. However, a cautious stance regarding 
pricing behavior is warranted given that inflation will stay above the target rate for 
some time due to recent increases  in administered and energy prices.   
13. Although the risk appetite has improved due to recent developments in financial 
markets, ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy necessitate the 
monetary policy to remain flexible on both sides. Uncertainties persist regarding 
the deleveraging in public, household, and bank balance sheets. The protracted 
nature of the global recovery has been prompting the extension of quantitative 
easing packages across advances economies. Despite the steps taken  for the 
resolution of problems regarding the Euro Area, risk appetite remains highly 
sensitive to any new developments due to ongoing fragilities in the financial 
system, elevated levels of sovereign borrowing costs across peripheral 
economies, and weaken ing growth outlook. Therefore, it is highly likely that short 
term capital inflows will continue to be volatile in the forthcoming period. Under 
these conditions, it is important to preserve the flexibility of monetary policy in 
either direction. Therefore , the impact of the measures undertaken on credit, 
domestic demand, and inflation expectations will be monitored closely and the 
funding amount will be adjusted in either direction, as needed.  
14. Measures taken by the advanced economies during the third quart er of 2012 
have eased the tail risks and alleviated the fluctuations in the global financial 
system. However, there are still uncertainties regarding the implementation of 
policy measures. It should be noted that the Central Bank of the Republic of 
Turkey has adequate  tools at its disposal to use as needed under this uncertain 
environment.  
15. A prolonged weakness in global economic growth may prompt central banks of 
developed economies to sustain their monetary easing packages. Extension of 
the duration of new packages would feed into macro financial risks for emerging 
economies like Turkey. In  such a case a resurge in short term capital inflows may 
slow down the rebalancing process through rapid credit growth and appreciation 
pressures on domestic currency. Should such a risk materialize, the Committee  
may keep short -term rates at low levels wh ile tightening through macroprudential 
tools such as reserve requirements. Moreover, the automatic stabilizer nature of 
the Reserve Option Mechanism will support financial stability.  
16. Quantitative easing policies  by advanced economies  also pose risks regard ing 
commodity prices. However, upside risks on inflation could be contained under 
such a case, as periods of quantitative easing typically coincide with a weakening 
in the global economy. However, the Committee will take the necessary tightening 
measures, should the increase in commodity prices prove persistent and 
consequently lead to a deterioration in the pricing behavior.  
17. On the other hand, aggregate demand and commodity prices may increase faster 
than expected, should the measures taken towards the sol ution of problems 
regarding the global economy be completed sooner and more decisively than 
envisaged. Materialization of such a risk would possibly require a tightening using all policy instruments, as it would mean increased pressures on the medium -term 
inflation outlook.  
18. Unprocessed food price developments may lead to a more favorable inflation 
outlook at the end of 2012 than predicted. Despite the favorable course of leading 
indicators, a rather cautious approach was adopted, assuming that the rate of 
increase in unprocessed food prices will be close to the past years’ average. 
Year -end inflation may be lower than projected in the baseline scenario of the 
October Inflation Report, should unprocessed food prices display a more 
favorable course than envisa ged. 
19. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments closely while formulating 
monetary policy. Forecasts presented in the baseline scenario take the framework 
outlined in the Medium Term Program as given. In this respect, it is assumed that 
fiscal disci pline will be sustained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in 
administered prices. A revision in the monetary policy stance may be considered, 
should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this framework and 
consequently have an adverse effect on the medium -term inflation outlook.  
20. Prudent fiscal policy is crucial for preserving the resilience of our economy against 
existing global uncertainties. Strengthening the structural reform agenda that 
would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipl ine and reduce the savings 
deficit would support the relative improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk, and 
thus facilitate price stability and financial stability in the medium -term. This will 
also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and contribute  to social welfare by 
keeping interest rates of long -term government securities at low levels. In this 
respect, steps towards implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the 
Medium Term Program remain to be of utmost importance.  
 