No: 2012 – 17  Release Date: April 2, 2012 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: March 27, 2012 
   
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. In February, consumer prices were up 0.56 percen t and annual inflation went 
down to 10.43 percent. As stated in the previous Su mmary of the Monetary Policy 
Committee (the Committee) Meeting, food inflation d ecreased, while energy 
prices increased amid the soaring international oil  prices in this period. Core 
inflation indicators posted a decline after a long interval and services maintained 
their moderate course. 
2. Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic bevera ges group continued with their 
downward trends. Amid the sustained favorable outlo ok in the prices of fresh fruits 
and vegetables compared to the seasonal averages, u nprocessed food inflation 
went down to 13.21 percent in February. Similarly, annual processed food 
inflation decreased in this period as it did in Jan uary. Nevertheless, leading 
indicators suggest that annual inflation in both ma in food groups may increase in 
March. 
3. In February, repercussions of international oil price developments continued 
through fuel prices and annual energy inflation inc reased approximately by 1 
percentage point to 12.60 percent due to the low ba se. Uncertainties in oil prices 
pose upside risks to the inflation outlook. As a ma tter of fact, leading indicators 
suggest that the increase in energy prices will per sist in March as well. 
4. Annual services inflation edged down to 6.27 per cent. Annual inflation in transport 
services, which has recently trended upwards amid t he increase in fuel prices, 
posted a slowdown, while services prices excluding catering and transport 
remained flat at 4.9 percent. Rent increases stood at low levels in this period as 
well. Meanwhile, seasonally adjusted prices of serv ices and diffusion index 
suggest that the underlying trend of service inflat ion has sustained its mild 
outlook. 
5. Due to the developments in the prices of durable  goods, annual inflation in core 
goods recorded a decline, while seasonally adjusted  clothing prices increased 
further. In line with the alleviation of the cumula tive effects of exchange rate 
movements, the decline annual core goods inflation is expected to continue in the 
period ahead. Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. Following the robust course in the final quarter  of 2011, economic activity 
displayed a domestic-demand-driven deceleration in the first quarter of 2012. 
Seasonally adjusted industrial production plummeted  in January below the 
average of the previous quarter. Domestic sales of light and heavy commercial 
vehicles posted a decline in the January-February p eriod compared to the 
average of the previous quarter. Moreover, seasonal ly adjusted consumer loans 
confirmed the deceleration in domestic demand in th e first quarter of the year. 
7. Leading indicators suggest a modest recovery in consumption demand in the 
second quarter. Despite its low level, consumer con fidence has improved in 
recent months.  Following the decline in January, e xpectations on domestic new 
orders have assumed a gradual recovery trend. Addit ionally, the absence of any 
notable setback in new investment plans of the manu facturing firms coupled with 
the consistent upward trend in non-farm employment indicate that there is no 
permanent deterioration in expectations on demand. The Committee attributed 
the slowdown in economic activity in the early 2012  to temporary factors besides 
the tightening policy measures, and assessed that d omestic demand would 
resume its upward trend in the period ahead.  
8. Recent developments indicate that the rebalancin g between domestic and 
external demand continues in the first quarter. Not withstanding the persisting 
problems in the European economy, exports continue to grow at a steady pace. 
The ongoing slowdown in domestic demand and the cum ulative depreciation in 
the Turkish lira continue to restrict the import de mand and non-energy current 
account deficit. Accordingly, despite the elevated oil prices, the gradual 
improvement in the current account balance is expec ted to continue in the 
forthcoming period. The Committee highlighted that the correction in the 12-month 
cumulative current account deficit, which started i n November, would become 
more pronounced in late March. 
 9. Labor market data confirm the deceleration in ec onomic activity. Employment in 
the construction sector continues to decline, emplo yment in the services sector 
has recently lost pace. However, having noted that the two subsequent months of 
decline came to a halt in industrial employment, th e Committee stated that 
employment would continue to grow modestly amid the  recovery in economic 
activity. As a matter of fact, survey data point to  a partial recovery in job 
opportunities. Nevertheless, the possible domestic consequences of global 
uncertainties on economic activity stand out as the  factors that may restrain 
employment growth in the period ahead. 
 
 
Riskler ve Para Politikası 
10. The Committee has indicated that both the level  and the composition of the 
economic activity as well as the bank lending evolv e as expected. Accordingly, 
economic activity is anticipated to pick up gradual ly starting from the second 
quarter. Although loan growth rate may accelerate s omewhat in the forthcoming 
period, seasonally adjusted values are expected to stay in line with the 
assumptions of the January Inflation Report. 
11. The Committee has stated that short term inflat ion developments are also in line 
with the path projected in the Inflation Report. Oi l prices hover at higher levels 
than assumed in the baseline scenario, leading to a  higher than expected path in 
energy prices. However, so far this is largely offs et by the favorable outlook in 
unprocessed food prices.   
12. According to the Committee members, energy pric es pose upside risks regarding 
the short-term inflation outlook, whereas risks are  on the downside for 
unprocessed food prices. Especially, it is stated t hat possible hikes in electricity 
and natural gas rates could lead to a significant i ncrease in energy prices. The 
Committee has underscored that supply side developm ents will be closely 
monitored and any deterioration in inflation expect ations will not be tolerated.  
13. Given the current levels of inflation, it is im portant to prevent upside risks. 
Therefore, the Central Bank has implemented a new r ound of additional monetary 
tightening in order to eliminate the impact of rece nt cost developments on inflation 
expectations. Factors affecting inflation will be c losely monitored in the 
forthcoming period and additional monetary tighteni ng will be repeated, when 
necessary. 
14. Given the prevailing uncertainties regarding th e global economy, it would be 
appropriate to preserve the flexibility of the mone tary policy. Therefore, the impact 
of the measures undertaken on credit, domestic dema nd, and inflation expectations will be monitored closely and the fund ing amount will be adjusted in 
either direction, as needed. 
15. Moreover, taking the liquidity projections into  account, the ranges for weekly and 
monthly Turkish lira funding have been revised. In addition, certain revisions 
regarding the fraction of required reserves that ca n be held in gold have been 
approved. The Committee indicated that these measur es will support financial 
stability, yet they will not have a significant imp act on the stance of monetary 
policy. 
16. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price  stability while preserving financial 
stability as a supplementary objective. To this end , the impact of the 
macroprudential measures taken by the Central Bank and other institutions on the 
inflation outlook will be assessed carefully. Stren gthening the structural reform 
agenda to ensure the sustainability of the fiscal d iscipline and reduce the saving 
deficit will support the relative improvement of Tu rkey’s sovereign risk, and thus 
facilitate price stability and financial stability in the medium term. These measures 
will also provide more flexibility for monetary pol icy and contribute to social 
welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term gove rnment securities at low levels. 
In this respect, steps towards the implementation o f the structural reforms 
envisaged by the Medium Term Program remain to be o f utmost importance. 