 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: June 21, 2012  
 
 Inflation Developments  
1. In May, consumer prices were down 0.21 percent and annual inflation decreased 
to 8.28 percent. This decline was led by the favorable cours e of unprocessed food 
prices besides  falling energy pr ices in line with international economic 
developments. Clothing prices stood as a nother factor to contribute to disinflation ; 
and core inflation indicators went down in this pe riod. 
2. Annual rate of price increases in  food and nonalcoholic beverages group 
plummeted due to the high base in unprocessed food prices. Setting aside the 
base effect, seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices maintained their mild 
course by  display ing a month -on-month decline.  On the processed food front, the 
increasing  trend was sustained , bringing the annual rate of increase to 10.29 
percent. Although June indicators suggest that monthly unprocessed food prices 
maintain the moderate outlook, the reversal of the base effect is expected to lead 
to a limited increase in  consumer inflation . 
3. Easing international commodity prices is having a favorable effect on inflation.  In 
fact, energy prices d roppe d by 1.9 percent in May.  Mostly driven by fuel prices , 
this trend is expected to continue in June.  
4. On the services front, annual inflation went up to 6.92 percent in May.  This 
increase  is attributed to  the base effect in communication services  besides  the 
rise in prices of restaurants , hotels and transport services , as in the previous 
month . Seasonally adjusted price and diffusion indices do not point to an increase 
in the underlying t rend of the prices of services .  
5. As for the core goods group, annual inflation went down to 8.42 percent . While 
durable goods  prices decreased by 0.65 percent, clothing and footwear prices, 
which soared in April, increased at a rate quite below the seasonal averages in 
May. Although May inflation indicators reflect the related development in clothing 
prices, core i nflation indicators excluding clothing prices also exhibited a 
downward trend.  
6. In sum , mainly due to the developments in unprocessed food and energy prices , 
inflation followed a more favorable path compared to the projections in April 
Inflation Report.  No: 2012 – 29 Release date:  28 June 2012  Factor Affecting Inflation  
7. While domestic demand shows a significant slowdown in the first quarter, leading 
indicators suggest a modest recovery for the second quarter. Both survey 
indicators and the credit data signal that consumption demand assumed a mild 
trend of growth following the slump in January. In fact, h aving tumbled in January, 
industrial production index picked up within three consecutive months. 
Nevertheless, due to the deterioration in the recent global growth outlook and the 
risk appetite, it w as mentioned that the recovery in economic activity may be 
slower than expected in the second half of the year. Problems in the euro area 
economies, primarily in the Greek and Spanish context, weigh on the perceptions 
of uncertainty. Meanwhile, economic activity and labor market trends in the 
Chinese and US economies point to a weakening in the global growth outlook. In 
line with these deve lopments, expectations for orders of domestic manufacturing 
firms also trended downwards.  
8. Recent data confirm that the rebalancing between the domestic and external 
demand continues as envisaged. Exports continue to grow despite the weakening 
global outloo k. Decelerating domestic demand coupled with the cumulative 
depreciation in the Turkish lira continue to restrict the import demand and non -
energy current account deficit. Accordingly, the gradual decline in the current 
account deficit is expected to conti nue in the forthcoming period.  
9. Employment followed a weak course amid the slowdown in economic activity  in 
the first months of the year  and the downtrend in unemployment rates paused. 
Meanwhile, non -farm employment posted an increase in March period amid t he 
mild recovery in economic activity, which was supported by all main sectors. 
Trends in recent months suggest that the industrial employment continued to 
recover and services employment maintained its upward movement at a slowing 
pace,  whereas constructi on employment remained weak. Although leading 
indicators signal for a mild growth in employment in the short term, ongoing 
downside risks on the global economy may restrain employment growth in the 
period ahead.  
Monetary Policy and Risks  
10. The Committee has indicated that monetary policy framework adopted since end -
2010 has been quite effective in rebalancing the economy and reducing macro -
financial risks. This assessment is supported especially by the slowdown in 
consumer loan growth and the consequent impro vement in the current account 
balance.  Moreover, the moderation in economic activity and the fall in commodity 
prices contribute to the ongoing rebalancing process.   
11. Energy and unprocessed food prices follow a more favorable course than  
envisaged in the April Inflation Report, leading to a better inflation outlook . In this respect, it was noted that the expected increase in inflation to be led by the base 
effect in June would be more limited than implied by earlier projections.  In 
addition, aggregate dema nd conditions support the downward trend in inflation in 
line with the weaken ing in global economic outlook. Consequently, inflation is 
expected to stay below the path projected in the April Inflation Report  in the 
forthcoming months . 
12. However, pricing behavior should be closely monitored as inflation will continue to 
stay above the target for some time. Although medium term inflation expectations 
are relatively stable, the Committee highlighted that year-end inflation 
expectations remai n significantly above the target. Therefore, additional monetary 
tightening may be implemented along the guidance presented in the April and 
May Committee meetings.  
13. The Committee stated that, given the prevailing uncertainties regarding the global 
economy,  it would be appropriate to preserve the flexibility of the monetary policy. 
In this respect, it was reiterated that having the room for maneuver provided by 
the wide interest rate corridor coupled with the effective liquidity management is 
particularly im portant under current circumstances. Therefore, the impact of the 
measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and inflation expectations will 
be monitored closely and the funding amount will be adjusted in either direction, 
as needed.  
14. Moreover, in orde r to support financial stability, the Committee has approved an 
additional increase in the flexibility regarding the allowance to hold Turkish lira 
reserve requirements in foreign currency and gold.  The Committ ee members 
have underscored that these measure s aim ed at contain ing the adverse effects of 
the excessive volatility in capital flows on domestic markets. Moreover, it was 
reminded that should eligible conditions arise, the upper limit for Turkish lira 
required reserves that can be held in foreign exchange and gold could be raised 
up to 60 percent and 30 percent gradually  with incremental increases in the 
fraction of foreign exchange or gold that can be held for each unit of required 
Turkish lira reserves.  
15. The Committee monitors fiscal policy develo pments closely while formulating 
monetary policy. Although annual growth rate of tax revenues declined due to the 
slowdown in economic activity  in the first half of the year , primary expenditures 
has largely been under control. C urrent stance of the moneta ry policy take s the 
Medium Term Program as given and thus assume s that fiscal discipline will be 
maintained. Besides, the projections presented in the April Inflation Report are 
based on the a ssumption that there will be no marked increase i n administered 
prices for the rest of the year. A revision in the monetary policy stance may be 
considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this framework and 
consequently have an adverse effect on the medium -term inflation outlook.  16. Strengthening the structural reform agenda to ensure the sustainability of the 
fiscal discipline and reduce the saving deficit will support the relative improvement 
of Turkey's sovereign risk, and thus facilitate price stability and financial stability in 
the medium term. These measures will also provide more flexibility for monetary 
policy and contribute to social welfare by keeping interest rates of long -term 
government securities at low levels. In this respect, steps to be taken for the 
implementation of  structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term Program 
remain to be of utmost importance.  
 