No: 2012 - 08 
Release Date: January 31 , 2012  
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: January 24 , 201 2  
 
 
Inflation Developments  
1. In December, consumer prices were up 0.58 percent and annual inflation reached  
10.45 percent. As s tated in the previous Summary of the Mone tary Policy 
Committee (the C ommittee) Meeting, annual food inflation surged owing to 
unprocessed food prices  in December . Annual c ore goods inflation continued to 
rise due to  the lagged effects of the exchange rate pass -through . Meanwhile, the 
uptrend in core inflation indicators came to a halt owing to  the moderate course of 
the services prices.  
2. Prices of food and al coholic beverages increased by 1 .97 percent in December, 
and annual inflation in this group went up to 12 .21 percent. Processed food prices 
continued to increase , albeit at a slower pace. The sharp rise in  the prices of 
vegetables pushed up the unprocessed good  inflation  significantly. Thus, 
quarterly inflation in this group recorded the  historically highest increase since the 
inception of the  new CPI index . Coupled with the low base effect, this surge led 
the contribution of unprocessed food prices to increase by  2.5 percentage points  
in one quarter . 
3. Prices of services rose by 0. 29 percent in December, and annual services 
inflation  fell to 6.27 percent due to the high base of  the communication services . 
Annual inflation  increased slightly in rents  as well as in restaurant and hotel 
services. Prices of t ransport services, which have been trend ing upwards recently 
amid the depreciation of the Turkish lira, remained flat on monthly terms . 
Meanwhile, s easonally adjusted prices of services and diffusion ind ex indicate a 
slowdown in the underlying trend  of service  inflation.   
4. Core goods inflation rose to 10.09 percent in December. Having recor ded a 
decline in clothing and footwear group, a nnual inflation continued to rise in core 
goods excluding clothing amid the lagged effects of the depreciation in the 
Turkish lira.  Exchange rate pass -through effects on core goods prices are 
expected to persist in January, albeit at milder extent .   
 Factors Affecting Inflation  
5. Data releases on the final quarter of 2011 suggest that e conomic activity  
decelerated slightly, yet remained  robust . Seasonally adjusted industrial 
production posted a stronger quarterly increase  in the October -November period , 
while the capacity utilization rate trended upwards following a decline in two 
subsequent quarters. As for  the services  sector , employment  maintains its  stable 
upward trend .  
6. Amid the monetary tightening implemented  since October and the ongoing global 
problems, domestic demand is expected to follow a moderate path in the 
forthcoming period, as suggested by recent trends in consumer loan growth and 
firms’ domestic orders . Moreover, the moderate course of d omestic real turnover 
indices of the manufacturing industry as of the onset of 2011 continued in the 
October -November period, which indicates that final domestic demand has not 
accelerated further.  
7. External demand remains weak. Amid the recently aggravated  problems in the 
euro area, medium -term growth forecasts for the global economy have been 
revised downwards. The global outlook for 2012 points to a slowdown in almost 
all economies. Thus, the Committee underlined that global problems would 
continue to res train foreign demand notwithstanding the improved market 
diversification and enhanced competitiveness provided by exchange rate 
movements. It was also highlighted that restrictive  effects of the ongoing 
slowdown in domestic demand and the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira 
on imports has become more evident .  
8. Seasonally adjusted non -farm employment posted a decline in October after an 
extended steady -growth period, interru pting the stable downtrend in 
unemployment rates. The fall in non -farm employment was driven by the 
construction and industrial sectors. The Committee has noted that the recent 
decline in construction employment may con tinue further , while the industrial 
sector employment  may post an increase in the short -term. 
 
Risks and Monetary Policy  
9. Recent data releases confirm that the rebalancing between the domestic and 
external demand is ongoing as envisaged. Final domestic demand is decelerating 
and the contribution of net external demand to growth is increasing. Accordingly, 
the rebalancing process and the improvement in the current account deficit would 
continue in the forthcoming period.  10. The Committee has noted that annual inflation will stay at high l evels in the short -
term due to accumulated price increases that occurred during the final quarter of 
2011. In order to prevent the potential second round effects, the Central Bank has 
delivered an important monetary tightening since October. Accordingly, d omestic 
demand is expected to follow a moderate path in the forthcoming period, as 
suggested by recent trends in consumer loan growth and firms’ domestic orders. 
Therefore, the Committee expects second round effects of the temporary price 
movements to rema in contained and disinflation process to accelerate, especially 
in the final quarter of 2012 with the support of base effects.  
11. In light of the past three months’ developments, the Committee has assessed the 
inflation forecast to appear in the January Infla tion Report. The committee 
members indicated that reducing inflation from 10.45 percent to 5 percent target 
within 12 months would lead to unfavorable fluctuations in economic activity; 
accordingly, it would be more appropriate to bring inflation back to t he target in 
one and a half year. In other words, the baseline forecast would envisage inflation 
to reach the target of 5 percent by mid -2013. However, the target might be 
attained by the end of 2012, should the risk appetite improve markedly in the 
forthc oming period and the capital flows towards emerging economies re -
accelerate, leading to a strong appreciation of the Turkish lira.  
12. The Committee has indicated that tight monetary policy stance should be 
maintained for a while in order to keep inflation out look consistent with the 
medium term targets. However, given the prevailing uncertainties regarding the 
global economy, it would be appropriate to preserve the flexibility of the monetary 
policy. Therefore, the impact of the measures undertaken on credit, domestic 
demand, and inflation expectations will be monitored closely and the amount of 
Turkish lira funding via one -week repo auctions will be adjusted in either direction, 
as needed.  
13. Moreover, considering the ongoing improvement in the current account dy namics 
and the sudden swings in global conditions, the Committee has indicated that 
intraday foreign exchange sale auctions will be more effective and more 
consistent with the monetary policy objectives, compared to the regular foreign 
exchange sale auctio ns. 
14. The Committee noted that inflation will hover at high levels in the short term, and 
this poses risks regarding second round effects. Although the monetary tightening 
delivered by the Central Bank since October has reduced the possibility of second 
round effects, inflation expectations and pricing behavior will be monitored closely 
and necessary measures will be taken to keep medium -term inflation outlook 
consistent with the target.  
15. According to the Committee members, the probability that the solutio n of the 
problems in the euro area may take a more protracted and painful process poses downside risks regarding global growth and risk appetite. On the other hand, 
perceptions regarding global economic outlook may turn more favorable than 
expected, should  the measures taken towards the solution completed sooner and 
more decisively than envisaged. Such a situation, coupled with the ongoing 
quantitative easing policies pursued by the central banks of advanced economies, 
may improve risk appetite and re -accel erate capital flows towards emerging 
economies. Overall, ongoing problems regarding euro area and uncertainties on 
the effectiveness of measures aimed at solving these problems, suggest that 
global financial markets will continue to be volatile in the fort hcoming period. 
These conditions necessitate a flexible approach in monetary policy, which 
utilizes multiple instruments. The Committee will continue to monitor global 
developments closely and take the required measures promptly.  
16. Another risk for the forth coming period is the uncertainty regarding oil prices. 
Although weak global outlook dampens commodity prices, rising oil supply 
problems recently pose upside risks regarding energy prices. Should such a risk 
materialize, the Committee will not respond to t emporary price movements, yet 
will not tolerate a ny deterioration in expectations.  
17. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments closely while formulating 
monetary policy. Current monetary policy takes the Medium Term Program as 
given and thus assumes that fiscal discipline will be maintained. A revision in the 
monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate 
significantly from this framework and consequently have an adverse effect on the 
medium -term inflation outlook.  
18. Monetary  policy will continue to focus on price stability while preserving financial 
stability as a supplementary objective. To this end, the impact of the 
macroprudential measures taken by the C entral Bank  and other institutions on the 
inflation outlook will be assessed carefully. Strengthening the structural reform 
agenda that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the 
saving deficit would support the relative improvement of Tu rkey’s sovereign risk, 
and thus facilitate price stability and financial stability in the medium term. This will 
also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and contribute to  social welfare by 
keeping interest rates of long -term government securities  at low levels. In this 
respect, steps towards implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the 
Medium Term Program remain to be of utmost importance.  
 