SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING
Meeting Date: April 18, 2012

Inflation Developments
1. In March, consumer prices were up 0.41 percent and annual inflation remained
unchanged at 10.43 percent. The surge in annual energy inflation continued amid
the soaring international oil prices in this period. Meanwhile, annual inflation in
core goods group decelerated, and the moderate course of services continued to
contain consumer inflation.
2. In food and nonalcoholic beverages group, seasonally adjusted unprocessed food
prices went down in March due to developments in fresh fruits and vegetables. As
for the processed food group, monthly rate of increase of prices slowed down
considerably, while annual inflation remained high on account of the cumulative
effects.
3. In March, the surge in fuel prices amid soaring international oil prices and the
depreciation in the Turkish lira became the main driver of the rise in annual
energy inflation. It is expected that the rises in natural gas and electricity tariffs, to
be effective as of April, will increase energy prices further; and these increases
will have a direct contribution of around 0.5 point to consumer prices.
4. On the services front, annual inflation in all subcategories other than restaurants
and hotels went down, while the historically low rate of month-on-month increase
in rents became noteworthy in this period. Seasonally adjusted price and diffusion
indices suggest that the prices of services sustain a mild outlook. As for the core
goods group, the fading effects of the depreciation in the Turkish lira on durable
goods prices pulled annual inflation downwards. Nevertheless, the upward trend
in core goods inflation excluding durable goods, clothing in particular, continued in
March.

Factors Affecting Inflation
5. National income data for the last quarter of 2011 remained broadly consistent with
the outlook presented in the January Inflation Report. Accordingly, economic
activity displayed a mild growth on a quarterly basis, and the balancing in demand
components continued at a strengthening pace. As a matter of fact, domestic
demand followed almost a flat course, while net external demand became the
main driver of both quarterly and annual growth in this period.

6. The Committee stated that economic activity has been losing momentum for a
while, and this deceleration became more pronounced in the first quarter of 2012,
which was attributed to domestic demand. Having plummeted in January,
industrial production index picked up slightly in February, but January-February
average has stood below the average of the previous quarter. In the first quarter,
domestic sales of light and heavy commercial vehicles posted a quarter-onquarter decline. Meanwhile, having exhibited a mild growth, seasonally adjusted
consumer loans confirmed the slowdown in domestic demand.
7. Leading indicators suggest a modest recovery in consumption demand in the
second quarter. Despite its low level, consumer confidence has improved in
recent months. Following the decline in January, expectations on domestic new
orders have assumed a gradual recovery trend. Moreover, the absence of any
notable setback in new investment plans of the manufacturing firms coupled with
the consistent upward trend in non-farm employment indicate that there is no
permanent deterioration in expectations on demand. The Committee attributed
the slowdown in economic activity in the early 2012 to the tightening policy
measures besides some temporary factors such as adverse weather conditions
and external uncertainties, and assessed that domestic demand would resume its
upward trend in the period ahead.
8. Recent data confirm that the rebalancing between the domestic and external
demand continues as envisaged. Notwithstanding the persisting problems in the
European economy, exports continue to grow at a steady pace. The ongoing
slowdown in domestic demand and the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira
continue to restrict the import demand and non-energy current account deficit.
Accordingly, despite the elevated oil prices, the gradual improvement in the
current account balance is expected to continue in the forthcoming period. The
recovery in the 12-month cumulative current account deficit, which started in
November, is expected to become more pronounced in March and April. As for
the medium and long term, the Committee highlighted that the new incentive
package based on state aid in investments would pull the current account deficit
downwards and bolster growth on the supply side as well.
9. Labor market data point that employment losses in the industrial and construction
sectors halted, and employment in these sectors has assumed a re-increasing
trend. The Committee estimates that rises in employment will continue in the
forthcoming period owing to the improvement in economic activity. As a matter of
fact, survey data point to a favorable outlook in job opportunities. Moreover, first
quarter indicators signal for a mild growth in employment. Nevertheless, the
ongoing downside risks on global economy may restrain employment growth in
the period ahead.
Monetary Policy and Risks

10. In light of the past three months’ developments, the Committee has assessed the
inflation forecast to appear in the April Inflation Report. The Committee members
have indicated that main factors affecting inflation are broadly in line with the
outlook presented in the January Inflation Report. Yet, it was noted that inflation
may hover above the envisaged path in the short term due to hikes in energy
prices. The Committee stated that it will not tolerate temporary factors to have an
adverse impact on the inflation outlook. Accordingly, it was underscored that
additional monetary tightening may be implemented more frequently in the
forthcoming period. In other words, notwithstanding the upward revision in energy
prices, inflation forecast for end-2012 remained intact at 6.5 percent due to the
offsetting impact of tighter monetary policy. In this respect, the inflation forecast is
based on the assumption that credit growth will be milder and output gap will be
wider compared to the January Inflation Report.
11. The Committee has indicated that inflation is will follow a volatile course in the
second quarter. The direct effects of electricity and natural gas price hikes on
April inflation is expected to be around 0.5 percentage points. Therefore, inflation
will increase temporarily and reach its peak in April. Due to base effects in
unprocessed food prices, annual inflation is expected to display a sharp fall in
May, and a modest increase in June.
12. It is expected that the tight monetary policy implemented by the Central Bank
since October will contain the second round effects, and thus inflation will follow a
downward path once the cumulative impacts of temporary factors taper off.
Accordingly, the Committee expects that inflation will decline gradually starting
from the third quarter and the downward trend will become more evident during
the final quarter of the year.
13. According to the Committee members, existing high levels of inflation and the
recent deterioration in short-term inflation expectations pose risks on the pricing
behavior. Annual inflation is expected to hover significantly above the target until
the final quarter of the year due to the sharp price increases witnessed during the
last three months of 2011, which necessitates a close monitoring of the pricing
behavior. Although the monetary tightening implemented since October has
reduced the possibility of second round effects, the Committee will adopt a
cautious approach by monitoring inflation expectations closely, and will take
necessary measures to keep medium-term inflation outlook consistent with the
target.
14. Ongoing uncertainties regarding global economy require the maintenance of a
flexible approach in monetary policy against possible volatilities in capital flows.
Although sovereign debt problems in the euro area have eased somewhat during
the first quarter of the year, bleak growth prospects and still-high borrowing costs
across the region keep the debt sustainability debates alive. Moreover,

deleveraging in the euro area banking system feeds into financial fragilities,
increasing the probability of a renewed deterioration in the risk appetite. On the
other hand, the risk appetite may recover faster than expected, should the
measures taken towards the solution of problems regarding the global economy
are completed sooner and more decisively than envisaged. Accordingly, the
Committee stated that, given the prevailing uncertainties regarding the global
economy, it would be appropriate to preserve the flexibility of the monetary policy.
Therefore, the impact of the measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand,
and inflation expectations will be monitored closely and the funding amount will be
adjusted in either direction, as needed.
15. Another risk for the forthcoming period is the uncertainty regarding the oil price
outlook. Although weak global outlook dampens the upside pressures on
commodity prices, prevailing supply-side problems pose an upside risk in the
short term regarding energy prices. Should such a risk materialize, the Committee
will not respond to temporary price movements, yet will not tolerate any
deterioration in expectations.
16. Unprocessed food prices pose downside risks for the inflation outlook in 2012.
The probability of a downward correction in unprocessed food prices due to the
high base attained by end-2011, coupled with favorable precipitation during the
recent months, increase the likelihood of a more benign unprocessed food price
path than implied by the assumptions. Inflation may reach the target faster than
projected in the baseline scenario, should the food prices display a more
favorable course than expected.
17. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments closely while formulating
monetary policy. In this respect, current stance of the monetary policy take the
Medium Term Program as given and thus assume that fiscal discipline will be
maintained. A revision in the monetary policy stance may be considered, should
the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this framework and consequently have
an adverse effect on the medium-term inflation outlook.
18. Strengthening the structural reform agenda to ensure the sustainability of the
fiscal discipline and reduce the saving deficit will support the relative improvement
of Turkey's sovereign risk, and thus facilitate price stability and financial stability in
the medium term. These measures will also provide more flexibility for monetary
policy and contribute to social welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term
government securities at low levels. In this respect, steps towards the
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term Program
remain to be of utmost importance.

