No: 2012 – 26
Release Date: 21 June 2012

DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
Meeting Date: June 21, 2012
Participating Committee Members
Erdem Başçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin, Abdullah Yavaş,
Mehmet Yörükoğlu
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to keep the short term
interest rates constant at the following levels:
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 5.75 percent,
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 5 percent, lending rate at 11.5 percent,
the interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via repo transactions
at 11 percent,
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing
rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 14.5 percent.
Recent data confirm that the rebalancing between the domestic and external demand
continues as envisaged. While domestic demand shows a significant slowdown in the first
quarter, leading indicators suggest a modest recovery for the second quarter. Exports continue
to grow despite the weakening global outlook. Overall, aggregate demand conditions support
disinflation, and the improvement in the current account balance is expected to continue in the
forthcoming period.
Energy and unprocessed food prices follow a more favorable course than envisaged in
the April Inflation Report, leading to a better inflation outlook. However, pricing behavior should
be closely monitored as inflation will continue to stay above the target for some time. Therefore,
additional monetary tightening may be implemented along the guidance presented in the April
and May Committee meetings.
The Committee stated that, given the prevailing uncertainties regarding the global
economy, it would be appropriate to preserve the flexibility of the monetary policy. Therefore,
the impact of the measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and inflation expectations
will be monitored closely and the funding amount will be adjusted in either direction, as needed.
Moreover, in order to support financial stability, the Committee has approved an
additional increase in the flexibility regarding the allowance to hold Turkish lira reserve
requirements in foreign currency and gold.
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to
revise its stance.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five
working days.

