No: 2012 – 35

Release date: 26 July 2012

SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING
Meeting Date: July 19, 2012

Inflation Developments
1. In June, consumer prices were down 0.90 percent, while annual inflation
increased to 8.87 percent. As also indicated in the previous Summary of the
Monetary Policy Committee Meeting, the favorable course of energy and
unprocessed food prices contained the base-effect-driven rise in inflation.
Meanwhile, the annual rate of increase of core inflation indicators went down.
2. In June, seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices posted a decline and
maintained their mild course. However, annual rate of price increase in food and
nonalcoholic beverages group went up to 7.38 percent due to the base effect.
Leading indicators for July suggest that unprocessed food prices will rise due to
the developments in the prices of fresh fruit.
3. On the processed food front, being mainly driven by prices of bread and cereals,
oils and fats, the increasing trend was sustained. The cumulative increase
especially in bread prices totaled nearly 8 percent in the first six months, which
was led by the arrangements in the Communique on Bread and Bread Varieties of
the Turkish Food Codex. These effects may continue have an adverse impact on
processed food prices in the short term.
4. Energy prices continued to decline in June parallel to easing domestic fuel prices.
Although developments in the first half of July indicate that the decline in energy
prices continue, the upward trend in international oil prices as of the end of June
poses a risk to inflation in the short term.
5. On the services front, annual inflation remained unchanged month-on-month at
6.94 percent in June. Annual inflation decreased in transport services, while it
increased in communication services and rents. Although diffusion index edged
up in this period, seasonally adjusted price data indicated a flat course in the
underlying trend of the prices of services.
6. As for the core goods group, annual inflation maintained its downward trend with
7.93 percent. While annual inflation in durable goods and clothing went down in
this period, other core goods items posted increases. Seasonally adjusted data
suggest that the underlying trend of core goods inflation slowed down remarkably

at the end of the second quarter. These developments led the underlying trend of
core inflation indicators to continue to go down.
7. In sum, mainly due to the developments in food and energy prices, mid-year
inflation was lower than projected in the April Inflation Report.

Factors Affecting Inflation
8. National accounts data for the first quarter of 2012 suggest that economic activity
remained consistent with the outlook presented in the April Inflation Report. While
domestic demand posted a mild increase in this period, net foreign demand made
a larger-than-expected contribution to annual growth. In other words, the
rebalancing process in the economy continued with a stronger pace. While
national income posted a quarterly decline in the first quarter, it was reiterated
that this slowdown reflected temporary factors.
9. Second-quarter indicators confirmed that the negative course in the first quarter
did not tend to be persistent and that the economy would return to a mild growth
path in the subsequent period. In fact, industrial production recorded a strong
growth in the April-May period compared to the previous quarter. The Monetary
Policy Committee (the Committee) members assessed that this also entailed a
compensation for the unfavorable outturn in the first quarter and therefore the
underlying trend in the economic activity followed a mild course despite the brisk
recovery.
10. The Committee noted that signals for a slowdown in the economy, which
gradually spread across the globe in the May-June period, posed downside risks
to the foreign demand outlook pertaining to the second half of the year. Problems
in the European economies, primarily in the Greek and Spanish context, weigh on
the perceptions of uncertainty. Meanwhile, economic activity and labor market
trends in the Chinese and US economies exhibited poor figures for the global
growth outlook.
11. Despite global economic problems, exports entailed a stronger underlying trend
compared to the pre-crisis period. The Committee stated that this could be
attributed to the lagged effects of rebalancing policies besides market
diversification in foreign markets. In fact, the rebalancing process continued in the
second quarter, which bolstered economic fundamentals and perceptions
regarding the Turkish economy. Despite a slight deterioration in expectations for
orders in the manufacturing industry and the retail sector, indicators for
medium/long term expectations like employment, investment plans and consumer
confidence point to a comparatively more favorable outlook.

12. Employment followed a weak course amid the slowdown in economic activity in
the first months of the year and the downtrend in unemployment rates paused.
Amid the mild recovery in economic activity, non-farm employment declined again
in the April period. Trends in recent months suggest that the industrial
employment recovered further and services employment lost momentum. Having
boosted in April, the construction employment largely compensated for the plunge
in February. Although leading indicators signal for a mild growth in employment in
the short term, ongoing downside risks on the global economy may restrain
employment growth in the period ahead.
Monetary Policy and Risks
13. According to the Committee members, recent data confirm that the rebalancing
between the domestic and external demand continues as envisaged. Domestic
demand displays a modest recovery as expected, while exports continue to grow
despite the weakening global outlook. Overall, aggregate demand conditions
support disinflation and current account balance continues to improve gradually.
14. The meeting also involved an assessment of the inflation forecast prepared for
the July Inflation Report. The Committee has indicated that the year-end inflation
forecast is likely to be revised slightly downwards due to recent favorable
developments in factors affecting inflation. However, it was stated that pricing
behavior should be closely monitored as inflation will continue to stay above the
target for some time. Although the monetary tightening implemented since last
October and the moderate aggregate demand outlook reduce the likelihood of
second round effects, pricing behavior will be monitored closely in the forthcoming
period.
15. Ongoing uncertainty regarding the global economy requires the maintenance of a
flexible approach in monetary policy. The perception that leading central banks
will keep interest rates at low levels for a prolonged period encourages the search
for yield. On the other hand, despite the steps taken for the resolution of problems
regarding the Euro Area, risk appetite remains highly sensitive to news due to
ongoing fragilities in the financial system, elevated levels of sovereign borrowing
costs and weakening growth outlook. Therefore, it is highly likely that short term
capital inflows will continue to be volatile in the forthcoming period. In this respect,
also considering the prevailing uncertainties regarding the global economy, the
Committee has stated that it would be appropriate to preserve the flexibility of the
monetary policy. The impact of the measures undertaken on credit, domestic
demand, and inflation expectations will be monitored closely and the funding
amount will be adjusted in either direction, as needed.
16. Moreover, in order to support financial stability, the Committee has approved an
additional increase in the allowance to hold Turkish lira reserve requirements in
foreign currency. Accordingly, the upper limit for the FX reserves that can be held

to fulfill Turkish lira reserve requirements has been raised from 50 percent to 55
percent, with a multiplier of 1.9 for the additional 5 percent tranche. The
Committee members have reiterated that this mechanism is designed to contain
the adverse effects of the excessive volatility in capital flows on domestic markets.
17. The Committee has also assessed the risk scenarios that could have an impact
on inflation and monetary policy outlook and possible policy reactions. According
to the Committee members, a further weakening in global economic outlook may
prompt central banks of developed economies to implement additional monetary
easing. Such an event would feed into macro financial risks for emerging
economies like Turkey. A resurge in short term capital inflows may slowdown the
rebalancing process through rapid credit growth and appreciation pressures on
domestic currency. Should such a risk materialize, the Central Bank may keep
short-term rates at low levels while tightening through reserve requirements,
utilizing the mechanism it has developed for reserve requirements by increasing
the coefficients which define the amount of foreign exchange to be held per unit of
Turkish lira reserve requirements.
18. It is also likely that problems in the Euro Area may further intensify, given the
ongoing deleveraging process in banking, household and public sector balance
sheets and possible delays in the institutional mechanisms to resolve the related
problems. Should such a risk materialize, the immediate reaction could be to
implement an active liquidity policy via the interest rate corridor; to be followed by
measures to relieve the tension in the banking system through the use of reserve
requirements as well as other liquidity instruments.
19. On the other hand, aggregate demand and commodity prices may increase faster
than expected, should the measures taken towards the solution of problems
regarding the global economy are completed sooner and more decisively than
envisaged. Materialization of such a risk would possibly require a tightening using
all policy instruments, as it would mean increased pressures on the medium-term
inflation outlook.
20. Another risk for the forthcoming period is the uncertainty regarding the commodity
prices. Although weak global outlook dampens the upside pressures on
commodity prices, prevailing geopolitical and supply-side problems pose upside
risks regarding energy prices in the short term. Moreover, the recent rapid
increase in agricultural commodity prices pose risks regarding processed food
prices. Should such risks materialize, the Committee will not respond to
temporary price movements, yet will not tolerate any permanent deterioration in
expectations and pricing behavior.
21. Unprocessed food prices pose downside risks for the inflation outlook in 2012, as
indicated in the April Inflation Report. The revised forecast adopts a rather
cautious approach, assuming a reversal in the favorable trend observed during

the first half of the year. End-year inflation may be lower than projected in the
baseline scenario presented in the new Inflation Report, should the unprocessed
food prices display a more favorable course than expected.
22. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments closely while formulating
monetary policy. Current monetary policy stance takes the framework outlined in
the Medium Term Program as given. In this respect, it is assumed that there will
be no additional deterioration in the budget balance in the second half of the year
as well as no unforeseen hikes in administered prices. A revision in the monetary
policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly
from this framework and have a consequent adverse effect on the medium-term
inflation outlook.
23. Maintaining the prudent fiscal policy implemented in recent years is crucial for
preserving the resilience of our economy against existing global uncertainties.
Strengthening the structural reform agenda that would ensure the sustainability of
the fiscal discipline and reduce the saving deficit, would support the relative
improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thus facilitate price stability and
financial stability in the medium term. This will also provide more flexibility for
monetary policy and contribute to social welfare by keeping interest rates of longterm government securities at low levels. In this respect, steps towards
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term Program
remain to be of utmost importance.

