No: 2012- 53             Release Date: November 20,  2012 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: November 20, 2012 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to adjust the short term 
interest rates as follows: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) has been ke pt at 5.75 percent. 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate has bee n kept at 5 percent while lending 
rate has been cut from 9.5 percent to 9 percent. In terest rate on borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions has been cut from 9 percent to 8.5 
percent. 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing 
rate has been kept at 0 percent while lending rate has been cut from 12.5 percent to 12 
percent. 
Recent data confirm that the rebalancing between th e domestic and external demand 
continues as envisaged. Domestic demand follows a m oderate pace, while exports continue to 
increase despite the weakening global outlook. Over all, aggregate demand conditions support 
disinflation and current account deficit continues to decline gradually. 
The Committee expects that year-end inflation will be lower than the forecast presented 
at the October Inflation Report, owing to the favor able course of unprocessed food prices. 
However, indirect effects of recent increases in ad ministered and energy prices are closely 
monitored in terms of medium term inflation outlook . 
Although recent developments have improved the risk  appetite towards Turkish 
economy, ongoing uncertainties regarding the global  economy necessitate the monetary policy 
to remain flexible in both directions. Therefore, t he impact of the measures undertaken on 
credit, domestic demand, and inflation expectations  will be monitored closely and the funding 
amount will be adjusted in either direction, as nee ded. 
The Committee has stated that increasing the reserv e option coefficients and narrowing 
the interest rate corridor by a measured amount wou ld support financial stability. If deemed 
necessary for financial stability, a measured cut m ay be considered in the policy rate and the 
overnight borrowing rate in the forthcoming period.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to 
revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five 
working days. 