 
    No: 2012- 48               Release Date: October 18 , 2012 
 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: October 18, 2012 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to adjust the short term 
interest rates as follows: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) has been ke pt at 5.75 percent. 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate has bee n kept at 5 percent while lending 
rate has been cut from 10 percent to 9.5 percent. I nterest rate on borrowing facilities 
provided for primary dealers via repo transactions has been cut from 9.5 percent to 9 
percent. 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing 
rate has been kept at 0 percent while lending rate has been cut from 13 percent to 12.5 
percent. 
Recent data confirm that the rebalancing between th e domestic and external demand 
continues as envisaged. Domestic demand follows a m oderate pace, while exports continue to 
increase despite the weakening global outlook. Over all, aggregate demand conditions support 
disinflation and current account deficit continues to decline gradually. 
The Committee expects the fall in inflation to beco me more evident during the last 
quarter of the year. However, a cautious stance reg arding pricing behavior is warranted given 
that inflation will stay above the target rate for some time due to recent increases in 
administered and energy prices.  
Although the risk appetite has improved due to rece nt developments in financial 
markets, ongoing uncertainties regarding the global  economy necessitate the monetary policy to 
remain flexible on both sides. Therefore, the impac t of the measures undertaken on credit, 
domestic demand, and inflation expectations will be  monitored closely and the funding amount 
will be adjusted in either direction, as needed.  
The Committee has stated that increasing the reserv e option coefficients and narrowing 
the interest rate corridor by a measured amount wou ld support financial stability. If deemed 
necessary, a measured step in the same direction ma y be taken in the forthcoming period. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to 
revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five 
working days. 