No: 2012 – 37

Release Date: 16 August 2012

DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
Meeting Date: August 16, 2012
Participating Committee Members
Erdem Başçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin,
Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to keep the short term
interest rates constant at the following levels:
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 5.75 percent,
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 5 percent, lending rate at 11.5 percent,
the interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via repo transactions
at 11 percent,
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing
rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 14.5 percent.
Recent data confirm that the rebalancing between the domestic and external demand
continues as envisaged. Domestic demand displays a modest recovery, while exports continue
to grow despite the weakening global outlook. Overall, aggregate demand conditions support
disinflation and current account balance continues to improve gradually.
The Committee expects inflation to follow a downward course in the forthcoming period
as indicated in July Inflation Report. However, pricing behavior should be closely monitored as
inflation will continue to stay above the target for some time.
The Committee has stated that, given the prevailing uncertainties regarding the global
economy, it would be appropriate to preserve the flexibility of the monetary policy on both sides.
Therefore, the impact of the measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and inflation
expectations will be monitored closely and the funding amount will be adjusted in either
direction, as needed.
Moreover, in order to support financial stability, the Committee has approved an
additional increase in the ratio of allowance to hold Turkish lira reserve requirements in foreign
currency and gold, and a limited increase in the coefficient of the option to hold foreign
exchange for the Turkish lira reserve requirements (reserve option coefficient) for the first
tranche.
In light of these developments, the Committee has indicated that interest rate corridor
may be narrowed gradually in the forthcoming period.
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to
revise its stance.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five
working days.

