No: 2012- 57                       Release Date: De cember 18, 2012 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: December 18, 2012 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Necati Şahin, Abdullah Yava ş, 
Mehmet Yörüko ğlu. Absent:  Turalay Kenç (on duty). 
 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to adjust the short term 
interest rates as follows: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) has been cu t from 5.75 percent to 5.5 percent. 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate has bee n kept at 5 percent while lending 
rate has been kept at 9 percent. Interest rate on b orrowing facilities provided for primary 
dealers via repo transactions has been kept at 8.5 percent. 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing 
rate has been kept at 0 percent while lending rate has been kept at 12 percent. 
Recent data confirm that the rebalancing between th e domestic and external demand 
continues as envisaged. Domestic demand follows a m oderate pace while exports continue to 
increase despite weakening global activity. Overall , aggregate demand conditions support 
disinflation and current account deficit continues to decline gradually. 
Confidence indices and credit growth show a marked increase, supported by the 
accommodative liquidity policies implemented by the  Central Bank since mid-year and the 
relative improvement in the risk appetite. Therefor e, the contribution of domestic demand to 
economic growth is expected to increase in the fort hcoming period. 
The Committee expects that year-end inflation will be significantly lower than the 
forecast presented in the October Inflation Report,  owing to the favorable course of 
unprocessed food prices. However, indirect effects of recent increases in administered and 
energy prices are closely monitored in terms of the  medium term inflation outlook. 
The Committee has stated that, in order to contain the risks on financial stability in the 
face of accelerating capital inflows, the proper po licy would be to keep interest rates at low 
levels while continuing with macroprudential measur es. Accordingly, the Committee has 
indicated that, in order to support financial stabi lity, it would be appropriate to take additional 
steps using reserve requirements, while delivering a limited cut in the policy rate. In the 
following period, if deemed necessary for financial  stability, a measured adjustment in the 
interest rate corridor might also be considered. 
Ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy necessitate the monetary policy to 
remain flexible in both directions. Therefore, the impact of the measures undertaken on credit, 
domestic demand, and inflation expectations will be  monitored closely and the funding amount 
will be adjusted in either direction, as needed. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to 
revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five 
working days. 