 
 No: 2012 - 12  
Release Date: February 28, 2012 
 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: February 21, 2012 
   
 
  Inflation Developments 
1. In January, consumer prices were up 0.56 percent an d annual inflation reached 
10.61 percent. While the lagged effects of the exchange  rate pass-through 
continued through the prices of core goods, services prices followed a moderate 
course in this period. 
2. Annual inflation in food and alcoholic beverages grou p went down to 11.67 
percent. Seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices slowe d down in January 
following a notable increase in the last quarter of 2 011. Although processed food 
prices went up by 1.06 percent in the same period, ann ual inflation in this group 
recorded a decline after a long period. Leading indi cators suggest that food 
inflation will continue to decrease in February.  
3. Among subcategories, energy prices stood out recordi ng the highest increase in 
January. Owing to the increases in all subcategories, pr imarily in water tariffs and 
fuel prices, energy prices went up by 2.19 percent in this period. International oil 
prices posted an upward trend in the first two months o f the year, posing upside 
risks on consumer prices. 
4. Annual services inflation increased modestly up to 6. 33 percent. Although annual 
inflation edged up in transport services, the favorable outlook continued in other 
services prices. Despite the high course of consumer inflat ion, rent increases 
remained at low levels. Meanwhile, seasonally adjusted  prices of services and 
diffusion index suggest that the underlying trend of se rvice inflation has sustained 
its benign outlook.  
5. Annual inflation in core goods climbed to 10.70 per cent in January. Lagged 
effects of the depreciation in the Turkish lira on core g oods continued especially 
through durable goods in this period. Nevertheless, the  prices of core goods are 
expected to follow a milder path amid the recent moder ation in cost pressures. 
Accordingly, the Monetary Policy Committee (the Commi ttee) expects core 
inflation indicators to follow a downward trend start ing from February. Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. Data releases on the final quarter of 2011 suggest that economic activity has 
remained robust. Seasonally adjusted industrial producti on posted a sizeable 
increase in December, and remained well above the aver age of the previous 
period on a quarterly basis. Although construction sector  displayed a slowdown, 
employment in the services sector maintained a stable upw ard trend. 
7. Following the robust course in the last quarter of 2 011, economic activity lost 
momentum owing to domestic demand. Domestic sales of auto mobiles and 
commercial vehicles posted a decline in January. In the mea nwhile, expectations 
on domestic new orders in the manufacturing industry mod erated. Consumer 
confidence remained weak in February; and seasonally a djusted consumer loans 
recorded a mild growth. 
8. Final domestic demand is decelerating while the cont ribution of net exports to 
growth is increasing. The recovery in global PMI indic es in January suggests that 
there is no further deterioration in global outlook  compared to the last quarter of 
2011, and supports the gradual improvement in exports.  Despite the recent policy 
actions towards a more expansionary monetary stance at a  global scale slightly 
alleviate the downside risks on global growth, the outlo ok for 2012 still signals for 
a slowdown in almost all economies. Highlighting that global uncertainties still 
remain significant, the Committee has noted that globa l problems will continue to 
restrain foreign demand, notwithstanding the improved  market diversification and 
enhanced competitiveness provided by exchange rate movem ents. 
9. The Committee also stated that restrictive effects of t he ongoing slowdown in 
domestic demand and the cumulative depreciation in th e Turkish lira on imports 
have become more evident. Accordingly, the rebalancing process and the 
improvement in the current account deficit will continu e in the forthcoming period. 
10. Labor market data confirm that there is no significa nt and widespread 
deceleration in overall economic activity. As opposed t o the decline in 
employment in the industrial and construction sectors in t he last quarter of 2011, 
non-farm employment remained robust thanks to the stro ng course of the services 
sector. Although leading indicators for the first quart er of 2012 do not indicate any 
deterioration in employment conditions, the Committee  has noted that the impact 
of global uncertainties on the domestic economy may co ntinue to restrain 
employment growth in the period ahead. 
 
Risks and Monetary Policy 
11. Recent data releases confirm that the rebalancing between the domestic and 
external demand continues as envisaged. The measures under taken in 2011 have not only led the credit growth rate to decline t o more reasonable levels but 
also removed the excessive appreciation pressure on the exchan ge rate; and 
both of these factors contribute the economy to attain  a more stable growth 
composition.  
12. The Committee has indicated that although there i s a noticeable slowdown in the 
economic activity due to weaker domestic demand in early 2012, this slowdown 
largely reflects temporary and seasonal factors. The Comm ittee members stated 
that domestic demand may recover in the forthcoming per iod with the improved 
risk appetite and increasing capital inflows. In fact, b oth the production of 
investment goods and new investment plans of manufacturi ng firms remain 
robust, suggesting that there is no significant deterior ation in demand 
expectations.  
13. Starting from February, core inflation indicators are expected to follow a 
downward path due to favorable cost factors. The pass-thro ugh impact of the 
exchange rate developments in 2011 to annual core goods i nflation is expected to 
ease in February. In the meanwhile, services prices ar e expected to follow a 
benign path in parallel to the moderation in domesti c demand.  
14. Developments since the Committee meeting in Januar y have eased the adverse 
impact of the Euro area-related problems on global m arkets, leading to a 
significant increase in risk appetite. This, in turn, has lowered the likelihood of a 
sudden capital outflow in the short-term due to a possi ble sharp swing in global 
risk perceptions. Therefore, also considering the recent expansionary monetary 
policy decisions at a global scale, the Committee has deci ded to cut the upper 
limit of the interest rate corridor. However, given th e prevailing uncertainties 
regarding the global economy, it would be appropriat e to preserve the flexibility of 
the monetary policy. Therefore, the impact of the me asures undertaken on credit, 
domestic demand, and inflation expectations will be mon itored closely and the 
amount of Turkish lira funding via one-week repo auction s will be adjusted in 
either direction, as needed.  
15. Although the Committee members expect inflation to follow a downward trend in 
the forthcoming period, they have also noted that in flation will hover above the 
target for some time. Inflation expectations are unde r control and there is no 
significant deterioration in the pricing behavior. Both  of these factors are seen as 
favorable developments for medium term inflation outlo ok. However, recent 
supply-side increases in energy prices pose risks to inf lation. In light of these 
assessments, the Committee has indicated that the cautious monetary policy 
stance should be maintained for a while in order to keep inflation outlook 
consistent with the medium term targets. 
16. Monetary policy will continue to focus on price sta bility while preserving financial 
stability as a supplementary objective. To this end, the  impact of the macroprudential measures taken by the Central Bank and other institutions on the 
inflation outlook will be assessed carefully. Strengthen ing the structural reform 
agenda to ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipli ne and reduce the saving 
deficit will support the relative improvement of Tur key’s sovereign risk, and thus 
facilitate price stability and financial stability in the medium term. This will also 
provide more flexibility for monetary policy and contr ibute to social welfare by 
keeping interest rates of long-term government securiti es at low levels. In this 
respect, steps towards the implementation of the struct ural reforms envisaged by 
the Medium Term Program remain to be of utmost impor tance. 
 