No: 2012 – 62       Release date: 25 December  2012  
 
 
 SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: 18 December 2012  
 
  Inflation Developments  
1. In Novem ber, consumer prices were up by 0 .38 percent and annual inflation went 
down to 6.37 percent mainly owing to unprocessed food prices. Core inflation 
indicators continued with a downward course amid cost and demand -side 
developments, while the prices of services remained mild.  
2. On the food and non -alcoholic beverages front, annual inflatio n went down by 3.5 
percentage points to 4.32 percent. Following an upward trend in the third quarter, 
seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices displayed a sharp decline in the last 
two months owing to the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables . Leading i ndicators 
point that annual unprocessed food inflation will fall in December as well. As for 
the processed food group , bread and cereals group prices continued to register 
increases, amid rising wheat prices. Processed food prices excluding breads and 
cereals also accelerated in the last two months . Nevertheless, annual processed 
food inflation went down to 9.13 percent upon the base effect. As for the energy 
group, annual inflation remains high with 1 4.5 percent, notwithstanding  a slight fall 
in November . 
3. On the services front, annual inflation remained at 7 percent . In November , 
communication services and rents saw increases; while transport and other 
services recorded a decline  in annual inflation . Both the underlying trend of 
seasonally -adjusted prices and the diffusion index of the prices of services 
remained on a mild track . 
4. Annual inflation in core goods group maintains its decelerating trend. In contrast 
to the fall in other subgroups, a nnual inflatio n went up in the clothing group  in 
November. Having  posted an evident fall, prices in durable goods went back to 
the levels of 2011 . Seasonally adjusted data show that the relative s low pace  in 
the underlying trend of core inflation indicators continued.  
5. Consequently, the Committee (the Monetary Policy Com mittee) projects that the 
decline in inflation will continue in the short term with the support of favorable 
unprocessed food prices.  Factors Affecting Inflation  
6. The GDP data regarding the third quarter of 2012 confirmed that e conomic 
activity followed a moderate course, albeit at a slower pace . Final domestic 
demand edged down upon the plunge in private investment demand. On the other 
hand,  while  exports of goods and services maintained an upward trend,  import 
demand fell, and accordingly  net exports rema ined as the main  contributor to 
growth. When the fall in the final domestic demand is jointly evaluated with the 
rise in export demand, a sustained balancing process in the economy is apparent.  
7. The Committee assessed that the industrial production in dex recorded a month -
on-month decline in Octob er, yet this did not completely reflect the under lying 
trend of economic activity in the last quarter . This relies on the fact that the 
divergence in the official and actual numbers of the days -off leads to a fluct uating 
course in production. Moreover,  increases in the expectations for orders of the 
manufacturing industry besides the PMI entai l positive signals for the course of 
economic activity in the upcoming period. Confidence indices and loan growth 
also suppor t this outlook.  
8. Recently released data suggest that despite the weakening global growth, exports 
continue to increase on the back of market and product diversification. Imports, on 
the other hand, are expected to slightly accelerate in the forthcoming mont hs due 
to the rise in domestic demand. However, the Committee estimates that the 
improvement in the  12-month cumulative current account deficit will c ontinue, 
albeit at a s lower pace .  
9. Seasonally  adjusted aggregate and non -farm unemployment rate displayed an 
increase in September 2012 compared to the previous period. Growth in labor 
participation rates overshot employment in this period, which led to a rise in 
unemployment rates.  Non-farm employmen t rate increased due  to the 
construction and ser vices sectors, while employment in the industrial sector 
continued to decline. Having decreased beyond expectations in October, 
industrial production is estimated to  increase significantly in November . 
Furthe rmore, the employment expectation data  in the Business Tendency Survey 
and the PMI employment  stand at a n optimistic  level in November. O ther leading 
indicators signal that mild increases in non -farm employment will continue.  
However , uncertainties regarding the global economy remain to be critical factors 
that may restrain the employment growth.  
 
 
 Risk s and Monetary Policy  
10. Recent data show that both the level and composition of aggregate demand 
evolv es in line with expectations. The rebalancing between the domestic and 
external demand continues as envisaged. Domestic demand follows a moderate 
pace while exports continue to increase despite weakening global activity. 
Overall, aggregate demand conditions support disinflation and current account 
deficit continues to decline gradually.  
11. The Committee expects economic activity to follow a stronger course starting from 
the last quarter of the year. In fact, confidence indices and credit growth show a 
marked inc rease, supported by the accommodative liquidity policies implemented 
by the Central Bank since mid -year and the relative improvement in the risk 
appetite. Therefore, the contribution of domestic demand to economic growth is 
expected to increase in the fort hcoming period. However, the Committee has 
underscored that, credit volume and domestic demand should continue to grow at 
a sustainable pace in order to preserve price stability and financial stability. 
Therefore, the impact of the recent significant fall in market interest rates on 
domestic demand and credit volumes will be monitored closely.  
12. The Committee expects that year -end inflation will be significantly lower than the 
forecast presented in the October Inflation Report, owing to the favorable course 
of unprocessed food prices. Core inflation indicators are also expected to follow a 
downward trend in the short -term owing to cost and demand factors. Moreover, 
inflation expectations display an improving trend. However, indirect effects of 
recent increases  in administered and energy prices are closely monitored in terms 
of the medium term inflation outlook.  
13. The Committee has stated that, in order to contain the risks on financial stability in 
the face of accelerating capital inflows, the proper policy would  be to keep interest 
rates at low levels while continuing with macroprudential measures. Accordingly, 
the Committee has indicated that, in order to support financial stability, it would be 
appropriate to take additional steps using reserve requirements, wh ile delivering a 
limited cut in the policy rate. In this respect, it was assessed that measured hikes 
in reserve requirements for foreign currency and in reserve option coefficients for 
gold would be useful. In the following period, if deemed necessary for  financial 
stability, a measured adjustment in the interest rate corridor might also be 
considered.  
14. Although, risk perceptions towards Turkey ha ve improved in recent months, 
ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy necessitate the monetary 
policy  to remain flexible in both directions. Therefore, the impact of the measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and inflation expectations will be 
monitored closely and the funding amount will be adjusted in either direction, as 
needed.  
15. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments closely while formulating 
monetary policy. Current projections for price stability and financial stability 
outlook take the framework outlined in the Medium Term Program as given. In this 
respect, it is assumed that in t he forthcoming period fiscal discipline will be 
sustained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices. A 
revision in the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal 
stance deviate significantly from this framework and co nsequently have an 
adverse effect on the medium -term inflation outlook.  
16. Prudent fiscal policy is crucial for preserving the resilience of our economy against 
existing global uncertainties. Strengthening the structural reform agenda that 
would ensure the su stainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings 
deficit would support the relative improvement of Turkey's sovereign risk, and 
thus facilitate price stability and financial stability in the medium -term. This will 
also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and contribute to social welfare by 
keeping interest rates of long -term government securities at low levels. In this 
respect, steps towards implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the 
Medium Term Program remain to be of ut most importance.  