 
No: 2012 – 21                                                                                    Release Date: 29 May 2012  
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: May 29, 2012 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Erdem Başçı  (Governor), Ahmet  Faruk Aysan, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin, Abdullah Yavaş, 
Mehmet Yörükoğlu  
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) ha s decided to keep the short term 
interest rates constant at the following levels:  
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 5.75 percent,  
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 5 percent, lending rate at 1 1.5 percent, 
the interest rate on borrowing faci lities provided for primary dealers via repo transactions 
at 11 percent,  
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing 
rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 1 4.5 percent.  
 
Recent data confirm th at the r ebalancing between the domestic and external demand 
continues as envisaged. While consumption demand  show s a significant slowdown in the first 
quarter, leading indicators suggest a modest recovery for the second quarter. Exports continue 
to grow at a steady pace . Accordingly, th e improvement in the current account balance  is 
expected to  continue in the forthcoming period . 
Although inflation will display a marked drop in  May, it is expected to stay significantly 
above the target until the last quarter of the year.  Accordingly , the current tight policy  stance will 
be maintained i n the forthcoming period  in order to contain risks regarding pricing behavior . The 
Committee therefore continues to forecast the year-end inflation to be at 6.5 percent  stated in 
the April Inflation Report . 
The Committee stated that, g iven the prevailing  uncertaint ies regarding the global 
economy, it would be appropriate to preserve the flexibility of the monetary policy. Therefore, 
the impact of the measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and inflati on expectations 
will be monitored closely and the funding amount will be adjusted in either direction , as needed.  
In this respect, shorter episodes of additional monetary  tightening may also be implemented, 
when  necessary.  
Moreover, in order to support fin ancial stability, the Committee has approved a limited 
increase in the flexibility regarding the allowance to hold Turkish lira reserve re quirements in 
foreign currency.  
It should be emphasi zed that any new data or information may lead the Committee to 
revise its stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five 
working days.  