 
No: 201 2 – 04         24 January 2012  
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: January  24, 2011 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Erdem Başçı  (Governor), Ahmet  Faruk Aysan, Turalay Kenç , Necati Şahin, Abdullah Yavaş, 
Mehmet Yörükoğlu.  
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committe e) has decided to keep the short term 
interest rates constant at the following levels:  
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 5.75 percent,  
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 5 percent, lending rate at 12.5 percent, 
the interest rate on borrowing  facilities provided for primary dealers via repo transactions 
at 12 percent,  
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing 
rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 1 5.5 percent.  
Recent data releases confirm that the rebalancing  between the domestic and external 
demand is ongoing as envisaged.  Final domestic demand is decelerat ing and the contribution of 
net external demand to growth is increas ing. A ccordingly, the rebalancing process and the 
improvement in the current account de ficit would continue in the forthcoming period . 
The Committee has noted tha t annual inflation will stay at high levels in the short -term 
due to accumulated price increases that occurred during the final quarter of 2011 . In order to 
prevent the potential se cond round effects , the Central Bank has delivered an important  
monetary tightening since  October . Accordingly, d omestic demand is expected to  follow  a 
moderate path in the forthcoming period , as suggested by recent trends in consumer loan  
growth and firms ’ domestic orders . Therefore, the Committee expects second round effects of 
the temporary price movements to remain contained and disinflation process to accelerate , 
especially in the final quarter of 2012  with the support of base effects . 
The Committee has indicated that tight monetary policy stance should be maintained  for 
a while  in order to keep inflation outlook consistent with the medium t erm target s. However, 
given the prevailing uncertaint ies regarding the global economy, it would be appropriate to 
preserve the flexibility of the monetary policy. Therefore, the impact of the measures undertaken 
on credit, domestic demand, and inflation expectations will be monitored closely and the amount 
of Turkish lira funding via one -week repo auctions will be adj usted in either direction , as needed.  
Moreover, considering  the ongoing improvement in the current account dynamics and 
the sudden swings in global conditions,  the Committee has indicated that intraday foreign 
exchange sale auctions will be more effective and more consistent with the monetary policy 
objectives, compared to the regular foreign exchange sale auctions.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to 
revise its stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five 
working days.  