 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 20 November 2012 
 
Inflation Developments  
1. In October, consumer prices were up by 1.96 percent an d annual inflation went 
down to 7.80 percent mainly owing to unprocessed food p rices. Core inflation 
indicators continued with a downward course amid cost and demand-side 
developments, while prices of services remained mild. Hi kes in the SCT (Special 
Consumption Tax) rates besides natural gas and electricit y tariffs are estimated to 
add around 1 to 1.1 percentage points to the annual i nflation. 
2. On the food and non-alcoholic beverages front, annu al inflation went down to 7.87 
percent. Following the upward trend in the third qua rter, seasonally adjusted 
unprocessed food prices displayed a decline in October. D ue to flat course of 
vegetable prices, which soared in October in past years, a nnual unprocessed 
food inflation decreased by 5.5 percentage points to 5 .35 percent. Leading 
indicators point that annual unprocessed food inflation  will fall notably in 
November as well. As for the processed foods, bread and  cereals group prices 
continued to register increases, amid rising wheat prices. Processed food prices 
excluding breads and cereals also accelerated in October. C onsequently, a rise in 
annual processed food inflation is registered. 
3. Hikes in the natural gas and electricity tariffs couple d with tax adjustments in fuel 
oil led the annual energy inflation to climb to 15 p ercent. 
4. On the services front, annual inflation edged up in  October. This rise was driven 
by the increases in the prices of communication services. In the services group 
excluding communication, annual inflation decreased in  October as it did in 
September. In October, the underlying trend of seasona lly-adjusted prices 
remained on a mild track, while the diffusion index of  the prices of services 
continued to increase.  
5. Annual inflation in core goods group fell by 1.32 percentage points to 5.1 percent 
in October. This decline was apparent in all the main se ctors of core goods, and 
particularly in durable goods. Seasonally adjusted data  show that the slowdown in 
the underlying trend of core inflation indicators cont inued.  
Factors Affecting Inflation  
6. Economic activity followed a moderate pace in the th ird quarter. A sizeable 
increase was seen in industrial production in September, yet it was attributed to 
the compensation of the decline led by the divergence in the official and actual No: 2012 – 56  Release date:  27 November  2012 numbers of the days-off in August. In fact, the third- quarter average of the 
industrial production index increased modestly quarter on quarter.  
7. Recent data releases point that economic activity wi ll be stronger in the final 
quarter compared to the previous quarter. Although sal es of automobiles declined 
on an annual basis in October, they remained above the  average of the third 
quarter. Three-month-ahead expectations for orders of the manufacturing industry 
firms continued to increase owing to both domestic and e xternal orders. PMI data 
also displayed a similar trend. Investment tendency still  follows a relatively weak 
course, albeit an increase recently after an extended pe riod. Monetary Policy 
Committee (Committee) stated that confidence indices ar e yet to improve and the 
uncertainties in external financial markets may put a cap  on the economic activity. 
8. The latest data confirm that the rebalancing betwee n the domestic and external 
demand continues as envisaged. While imports declined in the third quarter upon 
the slowdown in credit growth besides the relative pri ce movements, exports 
continue to increase despite the weakening global outlo ok. Overall, 12-month 
cumulative current account deficit continues to decline gr adually. On the other 
hand, the Committee highlighted that the rebalancing  process may lose pace due 
to the pick-up in domestic demand in the last quarter of  the year. 
9. Employment rate displayed a mild increase on accoun t of the slowdown in 
economic activity. Despite the rise in non-farm employm ent in August, there was 
a limited increase in the seasonally adjusted unemployme nt rate, owing to an 
increase in the participation rate. The rise in the non -farm employment rate is 
attributed to the construction and services sectors. Having  exhibited a limited 
trend of decline since the March period, employment in  the industrial sector 
declined further in August. Despite the recent rise in P MI employment index and 
industrial production, other leading indicators for the  industrial employment signal 
that employment growth may be limited in the forthc oming period. Moreover, 
uncertainties regarding the global economy remain to b e critical factors that may 
restrain the employment growth. 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
10. During the meeting, the Committee assessed the deve lopments regarding price 
stability and financial stability. In terms of inflatio n the main variables of interest 
were aggregate demand outlook, output gap indicators, and cost factors. With 
regard to macro financial risks, the focus was on credit, cu rrent account balance, 
and real exchange rate developments.   
11. According to the Committee, demand side indicators su pport the downward trend 
in inflation. Aggregate demand growth has slowed down  markedly in the third 
quarter, mainly driven by developments in final priv ate domestic demand. Although domestic demand shows some recovery for the fina l quarter of the year, 
aggregate demand conditions are still expected to suppo rt disinflation.  
12. The Committee assessed that cost factors have been contr ibuting to the 
disinflation as well. With the recent stable course of ex change rates and 
commodity prices, the accumulated pass-through effects of co st-push factors 
observed in 2011 have been fading away. Accordingly, co re goods inflation has 
been falling markedly since the beginning of the year.  Meanwhile, the underlying 
trend of services inflation has displayed a benign course.   
13. Taking these assessments into account, the Committee expects that year-end 
inflation will be lower than the forecast presented at the October Inflation Report, 
owing to the favorable course of unprocessed food prices.  However, indirect 
effects of recent increases in administered and energy p rices are closely 
monitored in terms of medium term inflation outlook. 
14. The Committee stated that, as of the third quarte r rebalancing in the composition 
of aggregate demand and thus the improvement in the current account balance 
continues, and credit volumes keep growing at reasonable rates consistent with 
the financial stability objectives. On the other hand,  it was indicated that the 
steady real appreciation trend in domestic currency obser ved since the beginning 
of the year should be closely monitored. The Committe e reminded that, under the 
current regime, there is no commitment regarding the l evel of the exchange rate; 
yet, in terms of macroeconomic and financial stability, it is important to take 
measures against excessive deviations from economic fundam entals, as needed.  
15. The Committee attributes special emphasis on credit d evelopments under the 
new policy framework. Given the weak outlook for globa l demand, keeping the 
rate of credit growth at moderate levels is especially i mportant for ensuring that 
both the level and the composition of the aggregate d emand move towards 
desired direction. In this context, it was underlined th at credit growth rates not 
exceeding 15 percent annually would support both the p rice and financial stability. 
16. The Committee stated that improved risk appetite towards Turkish economy 
provided room for a limited hike in reserve option coe fficients. It was indicated that 
both the improved risk appetite and the adoption of reserve option mechanism 
have eased the need for a wide interest rate corridor . Moreover, the moderate 
pace of commercial loan growth has allowed for a measur ed cut in the upper 
bound of the corridor. The Committee has therefore st ated that increasing the 
reserve option coefficients and narrowing the interest r ate corridor by a measured 
amount would support financial stability.   
17. The Committee indicated that ongoing uncertainti es regarding the global economy 
necessitate the monetary policy to remain flexible in both directions. Therefore, 
the impact of the measures undertaken on credit, dome stic demand, and inflation expectations will be monitored closely and the funding  amount will be adjusted in 
either direction, as needed. 
18. In light of these assessments it was stated that, if d eemed necessary for financial 
stability, a measured cut may be considered in the pol icy rate and the overnight 
borrowing rate in the forthcoming period. 
19. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments clo sely while formulating 
monetary policy. Current projections for price stabilit y and financial stability 
outlook take the framework outlined in the Medium Ter m Program as given. In this 
respect, it is assumed that in the forthcoming period f iscal discipline will be 
sustained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in ad ministered prices. A 
revision in the monetary policy stance may be considered,  should the fiscal 
stance deviate significantly from this framework and conseq uently have an 
adverse effect on the medium-term inflation outlook. 
20. Prudent fiscal policy is crucial for preserving the re silience of our economy against 
existing global uncertainties. Strengthening the structu ral reform agenda that 
would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings 
deficit would support the relative improvement of Tur key's sovereign risk, and 
thus facilitate price stability and financial stability i n the medium-term. This will 
also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and  contribute to social welfare by 
keeping interest rates of long-term government securit ies at low levels. In this 
respect, steps towards implementation of the structural re forms envisaged by the 
Medium Term Program remain to be of utmost importance . 
 