No: 2012 – 28

Release date: 21 June 2012

PRESS RELEASE ON THE FACILITY OF MAINTAINING RESERVE
REQUIREMENTS IN FOREIGN EXCHANGE AND GOLD

In accordance with the decisions taken by the Central Bank of the Republic of
Turkey (CBRT) on 29 May 2012, in order to narrow the cost differential of
maintaining the Turkish lira reserve requirements in Turkish lira or in FX, and enable
the banks to benefit fully from the facility as called for by their liquidity needs, the
upper limit for FX reserves that might be held to maintain Turkish lira reserve
requirements was raised to 45 percent, and the banks were allowed to hold Turkish
lira reserve requirements in US dollar and/or euro over the total amount calculated by
multiplying the first tranche corresponding to 40 percent of Turkish lira reserve
requirements by a coefficient of “1”, as previously, and the second tranche
corresponding to 5 percent of Turkish lira reserve requirements by a coefficient of
“1.4”. Since then, the banks have benefited from this facility considerably and
steadily, with an across-the-sector utilization ratio around 97 percent. It has now
been decided to raise the upper limit of the abovementioned facility to 50 percent.
The third tranche of this facility corresponding to the additional 5 percent will be
maintained in US dollar and/or euro over the total amount calculated by multiplying
by a coefficient of “1.7”.
At present, USD 14.3 billion is being held for Turkish lira reserve
requirements. With the additional facility being used in a similar fashion, the
expected figures for the increase in Bank’s FX reserves and the amount of
permanent liquidity to be provided to the market are approximately USD 2.7 billion
and TL 2.8 billion, respectively. The new regulation will be effective as of the
calculation period dated 22 June 2012 and the maintenance period will begin on 6
July 2012.

Meanwhile, with an aim to bolster the build-up of the Central Bank’s FX
reserves and to positively affect the cost and liquidity channels of banks, the upper
limit for gold reserves that might be held to maintain Turkish lira reserve
requirements, standing at an across-the-sector utilization ratio of 92 percent, has
been raised from 20 percent to 25 percent, and banks are allowed to hold Turkish
lira reserve requirements in gold over the total amount calculated by multiplying the
first tranche corresponding to 20 percent of Turkish lira reserve requirements by a
coefficient of “1”, as previously, and the second tranche corresponding to 5 percent
of Turkish lira reserve requirements by a coefficient of “1.5”.
Currently, TL 10.4 billion corresponding to 112 ton gold is being held for
Turkish lira reserve requirements. With the additional facility being used in a similar
fashion, the expected figures for the increase in CBRT’s FX reserves and the amount
of permanent liquidity to be provided to the market are approximately USD 2.2 billion
and TL 2.8 billion, respectively. The new regulation will be effective as of the
calculation period dated 6 July 2012 and the maintenance period will begin on 20
July 2012.

