No: 2012 – 10 
Release Date: February 21, 2012  
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: February 21, 2012 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Necati Şahin, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet 
Yörüko ğlu Absent:  Turalay Kenç (on duty). 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to adjust the short 
term interest rates as follows: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) has been ke pt at 5.75 percent. 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate has bee n kept at 5 percent while 
lending rate has been cut from 12.5 percent to 11.5  percent. Interest rate on 
borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers v ia repo transactions has been 
cut from 12 percent to 11 percent. 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate has been kept at 0 percent while len ding rate has been cut from 
15.5 percent to 14.5 percent. 
Recent data releases confirm that the rebalancing b etween the domestic and 
external demand is ongoing as envisaged. Final dome stic demand is decelerating while 
the contribution of net external demand to growth i s increasing. Accordingly, the 
rebalancing process and the improvement in the curr ent account deficit will continue in 
the forthcoming period. 
Starting from February, core inflation indicators a re expected to follow a 
downward path due to favorable cost factors. Also c onsidering the recent expansionary 
monetary policy decisions throughout the globe, the  Committee has decided to cut the 
upper limit of the interest rate corridor. Yet, the  Committee has indicated that the 
cautious monetary policy stance should be maintaine d for a while in order to keep 
inflation outlook consistent with the medium term t argets.  
However, given the prevailing uncertainties regardi ng the global economy, it 
would be appropriate to preserve the flexibility of  the monetary policy. Therefore, the 
impact of the measures undertaken on credit, domest ic demand, and inflation 
expectations will be monitored closely and the amou nt of Turkish lira funding via one-
week repo auctions will be adjusted in either direc tion, as needed. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the 
Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
five working days. 