                                                                               Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey  
          
January 31, 2012 
 
Ali BABACAN 
Deputy Prime Minister 
ANKARA 
 
As stipulated in the Articl e 42 of the Central Bank Law, in the case of a 
significant breach of the inflation target, t he Central Bank of t he Republic of Turkey 
(Central Bank) is required to report to the Government and announce to the public 
the reasons behind the breach of the target and the nece ssary measures to be 
taken. As stated in the main policy document titled “Monetary and Exchange Rate 
Policy in 2011”, which was published on Decem ber 21, 2010; the inflation target for 
2011 was set jointly with the Government as  5.5 percent. In the same document, it 
was also indicated that the Central Bank would wr ite an open letter to the 
Government should end-year inflation exceed the target significant ly (by more than 2 
percentage points in either direction). In flation reached 10.45 per cent at end-2011, 
notably exceeding the target. Th is text elaborates on the reasons why the target was 
missed and explains the measures taken— and to be taken—to bring inflation back 
to the target. 
Factors Affecting Inflation in 2011 The main factors causing inflation to exce ed the target significantly in 2011 are 
the high rates of increases in import pr ices and the exchange rate observed through 
the year. Between the last quarter of 2010 and end-2011, the rise in the domestic 
currency price of imports exceeded 40 perc ent. This, on its own, is estimated to 
have contributed to the annual inflation by approximately 5 percentage points. 
Besides the developments in imports prices and the exchange rate, another 
reason for the breach of the in flation target is the tax ad justment in tobacco products 
in October and the resulting surge in prices. With an annual rate of increase of 18.6 
percent, tobacco prices rose well beyond t he inflation target in 2011, adding 1.1 
percentage points to annual inflation. 
Another factor behind the rec ent surge in inflation is the high rate of increase in 
the price of unprocessed food stemming from excessive vola tility. The annual rate of 
increase in unprocessed food prices was 15 percent in 2011, cont ributing by around 
2 percentage points to CPI inflation.  
Overall, the developments in import pric es, exchange rates and the prices of 
unprocessed food and tobacco products were the main factors behind the breach of 
the inflation target at end- 2011. Among these factors, the only one that responds to 
Central Bank policies is the exchange rate. Therefore, it would be useful to assess 
exchange rate developments since end-2010 in  the context of policies pursued.                                                                                Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey  
  Capital Flows, Monetary Polic y and Financial Stability  
The ample and low-cost liq uidity arising from t he extraordinarily loose 
monetary policies implemented  by advanced economies in the aftermath of the 
global crisis fueled short-term capital inflows towards emerging countries as of 2010. 
Backed by its strong financial sector and robu st growth potential, Turkey has taken a 
large share out of these infl ows. The appreciation in the Tu rkish lira and rapid credit 
growth driven by increased capital inflows led to a sizeable deterioration in the 
current account balance. 
Having foreseen that the excessive appr eciation in the domestic currency and 
the rapid credit growth could challenge t he sustainability of macroeconomic stability 
over the medium term; the Central Bank  opted for a notable change in its policy 
strategy and increased the weight of financia l stability in its objective function. The 
fact that, in this period, inflation re mained below the tar get and continued its 
downward trend made it possible for the Cent ral Bank to focus on financial stability. 
Accordingly, as of late 2010, the Centra l Bank embarked on using multiple policy 
instruments concurrently, and implemented policies aimed at (i) reducing the credit 
growth to reasonable levels (ii) containing domestic curr ency appreciation that would 
disconnect the Turkish lira from ec onomic fundamentals, caused by the 
extraordinarily loose monetar y policies implemented by industrial countries. The 
Central Bank proved successful in both dim ensions to a large extent (Chart 1). At 
this point, it should be noted that, due to the deterioration in t he global risk appetite 
since August, the depreciati on in the domestic currency went beyond the intended 
levels feeding into the faster-t han-expected surge in inflation. 
Chart 1: Exchange Rate and Credits 
 
      
In sum, an important part of the gradual depreciation in the Turkish lira 
between the last quarter of 2010 and August  of 2011 is a natural consequence of 
the policies designed to mitigate macro fi nancial risks. These measures helped 
contain the effects of t he turmoil in the euro area as of August 2011 on our 
economy. If Turkey had gone through this per iod with an excessively appreciated  Chart 1.1.1.   
TL and Emerging Market Currencies* 
(Against the USD, Value of  01.10.2010 = 1) Chart 1.1.2.  
Loan Growth Rate*  
(13-Week Moving Average, Annualized, Percent) 
 
 * Average of emerging market currencies including Brazil, Chile, Czech 
Republic, Hungary, Mexico, Poland, South Africa, Indonesia, South Korea 
and Colombia, against USD. Increases denote depreciation of the currency.  
Source: Bloomberg, CBRT.   
*Adjusted for the exchange rate effect. 
 Source: CBRT. 0.920.981.041.11.161.221.281.341.4
1110
1210
01110211
0311
0411
0511
0611
0711
0811
0911
1011
1111
1211
0112Turkey Emerging Economies Average
0102030405060
Jan
Feb
March
Apr
May
JulyAug
Sep
Oct
NovDec2012
2007-2010 average
2011                                                                               Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey  
  domestic currency and a rapidly rising cr edit growth, the economy could have 
experienced a hard landing driven by balan ce sheet deterioration due to the rapid 
fall in the risk appetite.  
Policies implemented by the Central Bank with a view to mitigate macro 
financial risks have to be consistent with the price stability objective over the 
medium and long term. Ther efore, temporary price movements should not be 
allowed to deteriorate the general price setting behavior. In  this context, considering 
that a sound rebalancing proc ess in the economy has alr eady started, the Central 
Bank has re-focused on price stability as of the last quarter of 2011.  
Measures Taken to Bring Inflation back to the Target In order to prevent the surge in infl ation to worsen the price setting behavior, 
the Central Bank has delivered a strong monetary tightening since October 2011. 
Accordingly, the interest rate corridor was widened upwards and the cost of funding 
provided to the market was raised signif icantly. Moreover, with the aim of minimizing 
the adverse effects of abrupt changes in ca pital flows due to uncertainties regarding 
the global economic outlook, a flexible liquidity management strategy was designed 
and implemented.  
These measures brought credit growth to reasonable levels and inflation 
expectations were contained. Accordingly, as the accumulated effects of the price 
movements stemming from import pric es, exchange rate, and unprocessed food and 
tobacco prices fade away, inflation is expect ed to converge gradually to the target in 
the forthcoming period (Chart 2). It should be noted that due to the base effects, the 
decline in inflation will remain subdued in the sh ort term and become more 
pronounced in the last quarter of 2012. 
Chart 2: Inflation and Output Gap Forecast  
 
* Shaded region indicates the 70 percent confidence interval for the forecast. 
 
 
  -4-2024681012
1210
0311
0611
09111211031206120912
1212
03130613091312130314
0614
09141214PercentForecast Range* Uncertainty Band
Year-End Inflation Targets Output Gap
Control 
Horizon                                                                               Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey  
   
Reducing inflation from 10.45 percent to  5 percent target within 12 months 
would lead to unfavorable fluctuations in economic activity; accordingly, in the 
baseline scenario, it takes one and a half year to bring inflation ba ck to the target. In 
other words, the baseline scenario envisages  inflation to reach the target of 5 
percent by mid-2013 (Chart 2). However, the target might be attained by the end of 
2012, should the risk appetite improve mark edly in the forthcoming period and the 
capital flows towards emerging economies re-accelerate, leading to a stronger 
appreciation of the Turkish lira than assumed in the baseline scenario. 
Risks The fact that inflation will hover at hi gh levels in the short term poses risks 
regarding pricing behavior. Three-month a ccumulated increase in  consumer prices 
in the final quarter of year 2011 was 5.66 percent. This will stay in annual inflation 
figure for another three quarters. Therefore, it is highly likely  that annual inflation will 
stay significantly above the target until the last quarter  of the year, even if the 
underlying trend in the forthcoming period ease s to levels consistent with the target. 
Although the monetary tighteni ng delivered by the Centra l Bank since October has 
reduced the possibility of second round effe cts, inflation expectations and pricing 
behavior will be monitored cl osely and necessary measures  will be taken to keep 
medium-term inflation outlook consistent with the target. 
Overall, ongoing problems regarding euro area and uncertainties on the 
effectiveness of the measures aimed at  solving these problems, suggest that 
financial markets will continue  to be volatile in the forthcoming period. These 
conditions necessitate a flexible approach in monetary policy, which utilizes multiple 
instruments. The Central Bank will conti nue to monitor global developments closely 
and take the required measures promptly. 
Another risk for the forthcoming period is  the uncertainty r egarding oil prices. 
Although weak global outlook dampens co mmodity prices, heightened concerns 
about oil supply recently pose upside risk s regarding energy prices. The Central 
Bank will not respond to temporary pric e movements, yet will not tolerate any 
deterioration in expectations. 
Excess volatility of unprocessed food pr ices lead to unpredictable and sharp 
movements in inflation. This creates challenges for expectation management and 
often leads to undesired fluctuations in  financial markets. Taking measures to 
reduce the volatility of unproce ssed food prices is crucial fo r attaining price stability 
in the medium term. In this respect, espec ially in the fresh fruit and vegetables 
sector, it is important to ta ke the measures such as increasing the market efficiency, 
decreasing the sensitivity of production to  climate conditions, and improving know-
how and incentive structure.  
Monetary policy will continue to focu s on price stability while preserving 
financial stability as a supplementary objecti ve. The Central Bank will do its best to 
mitigate the adverse effects of the volatility in capital flows, by efficiently using the                                                                                Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey  
  instruments at its disposal. However, it should be underscored that continuous 
coordination among monetary,  fiscal and financial sector  policies is crucial, 
especially amid such a chal lenging global backdrop. For the medium and longer 
term, strengthening the structural reforms aiming to reduce the saving deficit would 
boost the resilience of the economy and reinforce sustainable growth. 
Conclusion Inflation exceeded the target signific antly at the end of 2011. Although 
depreciation of the Turkish lira explains  an important part of this development, 
several factors such as commodity pr ices, tobacco and unprocessed food prices 
were also responsible for the breach of th e target. The Central Bank has responded 
by a bold monetary tighteni ng and contained infl ation expectations. Accordingly, 
inflation is expected to move towards the target gradually in th e forthcoming period. 
The Central Bank will continue to monito r developments affecting inflation outlook 
and take the necessary measures to reta in the achievements on price stability. 
Inflation Report, published today on our website, which presents the 
developments regarding inflation and monetary  policy as well as our medium term 
forecasts, is enclosed for your information.  
Yours Sincerely,  
CENTRAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY 
      Head Office  
 
                                                                   Erdem Ba şçı            Mehmet Yörüko ğlu  
                                                    Governor
                  Deputy Governor  
  
 Enc: Inflation Report, January 2012  
 
                                                                  
 