No: 2012 – 18

Release Date: 18 April 2012

DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
Meeting Date: April 18, 2012
Participating Committee Members
Erdem Başçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin, Abdullah Yavaş,
Mehmet Yörükoğlu
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to keep the short term
interest rates constant at the following levels:
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 5.75 percent,
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 5 percent, lending rate at 11.5 percent,
the interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via repo transactions
at 11 percent,
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing
rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 14.5 percent.
Recent data confirm that the rebalancing between the domestic and external demand
continues as envisaged. While consumption demand shows a significant slowdown in the first
quarter, leading indicators suggest a modest recovery for the second quarter. Exports continue
to grow at a steady pace. Accordingly, despite the elevated oil prices, the improvement in the
current account balance is expected to continue in the forthcoming period.
Main factors affecting inflation are broadly in line with the outlook presented in the
January Inflation Report. Yet, inflation may hover above the envisaged path in the short term
due to hikes in energy prices. The Committee will not tolerate temporary factors to have an
adverse impact on the inflation outlook. Accordingly, it was underscored that additional
monetary tightening may be implemented more frequently in the forthcoming period.
The Committee stated that, given the prevailing uncertainties regarding the global
economy, it would be appropriate to preserve the flexibility of the monetary policy. Therefore,
the impact of the measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and inflation expectations
will be monitored closely and the funding amount will be adjusted in either direction, as needed.
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to
revise its stance.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five
working days.

