 
 
 
 
 No: 2012 – 46  Release date: 25 September 2012  
 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 18 September 2012 
   
  Inflation Developments 
1. In August, consumer prices were up by 0.56 percent,  while annual inflation 
decreased to 8.88 percent mainly owing to core goods prices. In this period, the 
underlying trend of core goods inflation maintained i ts downward course upon the 
alleviation of cost and demand-side pressures, while the se rvices inflation 
maintained its moderate course.  
2. On the food and beverages front, annual inflation remained flat with 9.14 percent. 
As for the unprocessed and processed food groups, annual inflation increased in 
the former, and decreased in the latter. Seasonally ad justed unprocessed food 
prices recorded an increase in August as they did in July.  In this period, not only 
the prices of fruits and vegetables, but also meat and milk prices went up. 
Leading indicators suggest that the rise in unprocessed  food prices has continued 
in September as well due to the price developments in  fresh fruits and vegetables. 
On the processed food front, bread and cereals saw pri ce hikes. However, the 
annual rate of increase in processed food prices decline d in August owing to the 
relatively mild course in other processed food prices. De spite the halt in the trend 
of price increases in international markets, the high leve l of wheat prices poses a 
risk on processed food prices; yet it is projected that the deceleration in 
processed food inflation will continue in the forthcom ing period. 
3. Amid the developments in oil prices, energy prices so ared by 2.29 percent in 
August parallel to the rise in fuel and bottled gas pr ices. On the services front, 
annual inflation has remained flat as it did in the l ast three months. Annual 
inflation declined in transport services, but increased i n rents in this period. 
Seasonally adjusted price and diffusion indices point t hat the underlying trend of 
the prices of services maintained its mild course. 
4. As for the core goods group, annual inflation decr eased by 0.7 percentage points 
to 7.41 percent. This decline prevailed among all subca tegories of core goods. 
Particularly, the cumulative increase in durable consum ption goods prices since 
the beginning of the year has remained limited, whic h is worth noting. 5. Against this background, the Monetary Policy Commit tee (the Committee) 
assessed that the decline in inflation might be subject t o a temporary halt in 
September; but the downward trend in inflation will  resume afterwards at a faster 
pace. As for the core inflation, a gradual decline is f oreseen to continue. 
 Factors Affecting Inflation  
6. Economic activity posted a remarkable increase in the second quarter of 2012 
compared to the previous quarter in consistency with the outlook presented with 
the July Inflation Report. Meanwhile, the Committee  underlined that this increase 
was mainly driven by the compensation of temporary fa ctors like adverse weather 
conditions that decelerated the economic activity; and t herefore the trend in 
economic activity manifested itself as a mild growth. Mor eover, it was reiterated 
that the increased contribution of net external demand  to growth reflects the 
impact of the policies implemented since late 2010 on t he rebalancing process. 
7. Final domestic demand has continued with a modest pa ce in the third quarter. 
Production and imports of consumption goods in July wen t above the average of 
the previous quarter. Automobile sales and consumption  indices pointed to 
increases, while sales of white goods posted a decline. M achinery-equipment 
production and sales of heavy commercial vehicles exhibite d a weaker outlook in 
investment demand compared to consumption. 
8. Production indicators confirm the mild outlook in th e economic activity. 
Seasonally-adjusted industrial production in July has l argely compensated for the 
decline in June. Three-month ahead expectations for or ders of the manufacturing 
industry firms increased in August as they did in July, w hile the capacity utilization 
rate remained flat. On the other hand, the Committe e stated that the deceleration 
in consumer and investor confidence and the investment t endency data posed a 
downside risk on the economic activity.  
9. The rebalancing between the domestic and external d emand continues as 
envisaged. Imports have recorded a decline amid the mild  credit growth and 
relative price movements, while exports continue to incre ase despite the 
weakening global outlook. Overall, 12-month cumulative  current account deficit 
continues to improve gradually. 
10. In June, unemployment rate went down on account of  the rise in non-farm 
employment. Non-farm employment rise was driven by s ervices and construction 
sectors, while industrial employment remained flat in t his period. Leading 
indicators for industrial employment signal for a decele ration in the pace of 
employment rate in the third quarter. Other indicat ors of the labor market suggest 
a slight slowdown in the pace of employment in the Jul y-August period. The 
Committee assessed that parallel to the moderate incre ase in economic activity, 
the rise in employment would also follow a mild course . Furthermore, uncertainties regarding the global economy remain to be critical factors that may 
restrain investment and employment growth in the peri od ahead.  
Monetary Policy and Risks 
11. In light of these developments, the Committee ind icated that aggregate demand 
conditions support disinflation. Moreover, easing cost pr essures, as observed in 
the moderate course of manufacturing prices, have been contributing positively to 
the core inflation dynamics. Accordingly, also taking acco unt the base effects from 
the previous year, the fall in inflation is expected to become more evident during 
the last quarter of the year.  Yet, the Committee un derscored that, given the 
recent increases in energy prices and given that infla tion will continue to stay 
above the target for some time, a cautious stance regard ing pricing behavior is 
warranted. 
12. The Committee indicated that the scenario present ed in the Inflation Report on 
“additional monetary easing by the central banks of de veloped economies” has 
been partly realized. In fact, recent developments have  led to an improvement in 
the risk appetite in global financial markets. The Commi ttee stated that this 
development has the potential to lead to an accelerat ion of capital inflows. 
Therefore, increasing the reserve option coefficients and narrowing the interest 
rate corridor would support financial stability. Moreo ver, it was indicated that a 
measured step in the same direction may be taken in the forthcoming period, if 
deemed necessary. 
13. In terms of smoothing the volatility in domestic mar kets caused by the capital 
flows, reserve option mechanism reduces the need for the  interest rate corridor. 
On the other hand, the Committee reminded that inte rest rate corridor has other 
functions both for the transmission of credit channel and for efficient liquidity 
management. Therefore, it was stated that interest rat e corridor will be continue to 
be used as an active policy instrument.  
14. Although the risk appetite has improved in financia l markets due to recent 
developments, ongoing uncertainties regarding the glo bal economy necessitate 
the monetary policy to remain flexible on both sides. Therefore, the impact of the 
measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and infl ation expectations will 
be monitored closely and the funding amount will be adjusted in either direction, 
as needed. 
15. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments clo sely while formulating 
monetary policy. Current monetary policy stance is based on the assumption that 
fiscal discipline will be maintained and the adjustments in administered prices will 
be consistent with inflation targets. A revision in the monetary policy stance may 
be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significan tly from this framework 
and have a consequent adverse effect on the medium-term  inflation outlook. 16. Maintaining the prudent fiscal policy implemented  in recent years is crucial for 
preserving the resilience of our economy against existing global uncertainties. 
Continuing the structural reform agenda that would en sure the sustainability of the 
fiscal discipline and reduce the saving deficit, would supp ort the relative 
improvement of Turkey's sovereign risk, and thus facilitat e price stability and 
financial stability in the medium term. This will also  provide more flexibility for 
monetary policy and contribute to social welfare by k eeping interest rates of long-
term government securities at low levels. In this respect,  steps towards 
implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by th e Medium Term Program 
remain to be of utmost importance. 