No: 2012-32

Release Date: July 19, 2012

DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
Meeting Date: July 19, 2012
Participating Committee Members
Erdem Başçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin,
Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to keep the short term
interest rates constant at the following levels:
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 5.75 percent,
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 5 percent, lending rate at 11.5 percent,
the interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via repo transactions
at 11 percent,
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing
rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 14.5 percent.
Recent data confirm that the rebalancing between the domestic and external demand
continues as envisaged. Domestic demand displays a modest recovery as expected, while
exports continue to grow despite the weakening global outlook. Overall, aggregate demand
conditions support disinflation and current account balance continues to improve gradually.
The Committee has indicated that the year-end inflation forecast is likely to be revised
slightly downwards due to recent favorable developments in factors affecting inflation. However,
pricing behavior should be closely monitored as inflation will continue to stay above the target
for some time. Also considering the prevailing uncertainties regarding the global economy, the
Committee has stated that it would be appropriate to preserve the flexibility of the monetary
policy. The impact of the measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and inflation
expectations will be monitored closely and the funding amount will be adjusted in either
direction, as needed.
Moreover, in order to support financial stability, the Committee has approved an
additional increase in the allowance to hold Turkish lira reserve requirements in foreign
currency.
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to
revise its stance.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five
working days.

