No: 2013 – 59 
Release Date: 26 November  2013  
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date : November 19, 2013  
   
  Inflation Developments  
1. In October, consumer prices edged up by 1. 80 percent while annual inflation went 
down to 7. 71 percent, which was mostly attributed to energy prices. With the 
delayed effects of exchange rate movements since May, core inflation indicators 
remained on an upward track.  
2. Annual food inflation surged to 11. 13 percent due to unprocessed food prices, 
driven by fresh fruit and vegetable prices . Thus, annual unprocessed food inflation 
rose to 14. 95 percent in October . On the processed food front, despite rising 
bread and cereal prices, annual inflation declined to 8 percent thanks to slowing 
price increase o f other processed food items.  
3. October’s energy prices edged down by 0.38 percent, due to the fall in local fuel 
prices largely amid decreasing international oil prices . In addition, with pulling out 
of last year’s massive price hikes, annual energy inflati on receded to 2. 14 
percent .  
4. Annual services inflation fell to 7. 86 percent in October . Seasonally adjusted data 
suggest that the underlying trend of services inflation decreased on a monthly 
basis . Annual core goods inflation increased to 7.10 percent due  to delayed 
effects of exchange rate developments . The increase in  prices of durable 
consumer goods continued while seasonal hikes in clothing prices were above the 
previous years . Hence, core inflation indicators remained elevated in October .   
Factors Af fecting Inflation  
5. Recent data releases point to moderation in final domestic demand for the third 
quarter . The production and imports of consumer goods increased quarter -on-
quarter during the third quarter . Similarly , data on sales of appliances and 
automobiles indicate a third -quarter increase in consumer demand . Meanwhile , 
investments remain weak . The production of capital goods, an indicator of 
investment demand, was up quarter -on-quarter, but mainly on exports, not 
domestic demand . The large third -quarter decline in imports of capital goods 
suggests that investments on machinery and equipment have not recovered yet .  6. On the production side, economic activity experienced a mild slowdown during the 
third quarter . The industrial production index saw a  solid growth in September, 
which, however, was an offset to the August plunge . In fact, industrial production 
posted a slower quarterly growth in the third quarter .  
7. Data on the latest quarter suggest that economic activity will continue to grow 
moderatel y. Although the October PMI data point to some slowdown, the 
Business Tendency Survey’s three -month ahead expectations were significantly 
higher on both domestic and exports markets . Among indicators of confidence, a 
key ingredient for private consumer and  investment demand, both the consumer 
confidence index and the firms’ prospects for new investments increased .  
8. Recent indicators suggest that exports continue to grow modestly . The non -gold 
export volume index was slightly up from the second -quarter avera ge in the third 
quarter . After prolonged sluggishness, the import demand from the EU, Turkey’s 
top trading partner accounting for a substantial portion of Turkish exports, has 
displayed some recovery lately . Moreover , global PMI data show signs of global 
economic recovery . Thus , external demand conditions are expected to support 
exports in coming months . 
9. Foreign trade and current account balance are in line with expectations . In 12-
month cumulative terms, non -gold exports remain on a modest uptrend, while  
non-gold imports post a relatively slower growth . Accordingly , despite the likely 
short -term increase, driven by base effects from gold trade, in the annual 
cumulative current account deficit, the gradual improvement in the non -gold trade 
current account de ficit will continue .  
10. In the third quarter, seasonally adjusted unemployment rose quarter -on-quarter 
on slowing non -farm employment . The slowdown in non -farm employment was 
evident across all subcategories . However , leading indicators for industrial 
employ ment show some improvement for September -October and suggest that 
employment will no longer weaken in the fourth quarter . Yet, global economic 
uncertainties remain a constraint to investment and employment growth over the 
upcoming period .   
Monetary Policy  and Risks  
11. In light of these developments, the Committee assessed that final domestic 
demand and exports continue to grow at a moderate pace. Third quarter data 
suggest a limited slowdown, while indicators regarding the final quarter exhibit 
some recovery in economic activity. According to the judgment of the Committee, 
aggregate demand conditions suggest that output gap is close to zero.  12. Besides the level of the output the composition is also closely monitored with 
regard to its implications on the externa l balance. The present policy framework is 
contributing to the improvement in the current account balance. The cautious 
monetary policy stance, recently announced macroprudential measures, and 
weak capital flows have led to a notable tightening in financia l conditions, which is 
expected to b ring down the loan growth rates to more reasonable levels  in the 
forthcoming period . Accordingly, moderate decline in the current account deficit 
excluding gold trade is expected to continue.  
13. Inflation indicators are lik ely to hover above the inflation target for some time due 
to the exchange rate volatility observed during the recent months. In order to 
contain the impact of these developments on the pricing behavior, the Committee 
decided to strengthen the cautious stan ce and reduce the volatility of short term 
money market rates.  
14. The Committee indicated that decreasing the volatility of interest rates in 
response to the weakening capital flows would be help to contain the adverse 
effects of the uncertain global monetar y policy on the domestic economy. 
Therefore, the Committee agreed to adopt a monetary policy stance in which 
short term interest rates follow a more predictable and stable course.  
15. The Committee stated that a liquidity management strategy that keeps the 
interbank overnight rate close to the upper bound of the interest rate corridor 
would not only limit the volatility of short term interest rates but also point to a 
more cautious policy stance. To this end, one month repo auctions will be 
terminated  and thus  the central bank funding will be conducted largely through 
overnight lending , as a result of which interbank money market rates will 
materialize around 7.75 percent. This decision will lead to a tightening through 
both a shortening in the maturity of the central bank funding and also through an 
increase in the marginal lending rates.  
16. The Committee stated that the cautious monetary policy stance should be 
maintained until the inflation outlook is in line with the medium term targets. It was 
underscored that, given the recent developments in monetary and financial 
conditions, monetary po licy stance is appropriate. However, it was also stated 
caution should be exercised against developments that may worsen the inflation 
outlook.  
17. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments and tax adjustments closely 
with regard to their effects  on the inflation outlook. The baseline monetary policy 
stance takes the fiscal framework outlined in the Medium Term Program as given. 
Accordingly, it is assumed that fiscal discipline will be sustained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administ ered prices. A revision in the monetary policy 
stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this 
framework and consequently have an adverse effect on the medium -term inflation 
outlook.  
18. Prudent fiscal and financial sector po licies are crucial for preserving the resilience 
of our economy against existing global imbalances. Strengthening the structural 
reform agenda that will ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce 
the savings deficit will support macroeco nomic stability in the medium -term. This 
will also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and improve social welfare by 
keeping interest rates of long -term government securities persistently at low 
levels. In this respect, implementation of the struc tural reforms outlined by the 
Medium Term Program remains to be of utmost importance.  
 