No: 2013 – 57
Release Date: 31 October 2013

SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING
Meeting Date: 23 October 2013

Inflation Developments
1. In September, consumer prices edged up by 0.76 percent and annual inflation
receded to 7.88 percent, which was attributed to unprocessed food and energy
prices. Due to the depreciation of the Turkish lira, core inflation indicators
remained on an increasing track.
2. Annual inflation in the food group went down to 8.73 percent. The unprocessed
food group saw a decline by 3.85 percentage points to 9.02 percent in annual
inflation due to falling prices of fresh fruits and vegetables. On the processed food
front, annual inflation reached 8.48 percent despite the decelerating course of the
prices of bread and cereals.
3. Energy prices went up by 1.38 percent owing to the depreciation of the Turkish
lira. Nevertheless, the annual energy inflation declined owing to the base effect.
Due to the elimination of the effect of public price adjustments in October in the
same period of the previous year, the annual energy inflation is envisioned to
decline further.
4. Prices of services increased by 0.90 percent, and the annual services inflation
edged up to 8.22 percent in September. Seasonally adjusted data suggest that
the underlying trend of services inflation remained on a high track as well. Annual
inflation in the core goods group climbed to 5.74 percent in September. The
effects of the exchange-rate pass-through are particularly visible in prices of
durable goods. On account of this outlook for services and core goods, the
underlying trend of an increase in core inflation indicators followed an upward
course.
5. In sum, inflation is expected to fall further in the upcoming period; yet, core
inflation indicators are foreseen to remain above the target for a while due to
recent exchange rate developments.

Factors Affecting Inflation
6. Recently-released data indicate that final domestic demand exhibited a mild
recovery in the third quarter. Consumption goods displayed a decrease in the
July-August period compared to the second quarter, while available data
regarding the imports of consumption goods and the sales of white goods and
automobiles indicate an increase in consumption demand. On the other hand,
imports of capital goods and production of capital goods excluding vehicles
besides the production of other non-metallic minerals display a sluggish outlook in
investments compared to consumption demand.
7. Indicators of the PMI and the Business Tendency Survey reveal a mild recovery
across the third quarter. Headline PMI and PMI production indices remained
above the second-quarter-levels. Moreover, the three-month-ahead expectation
for orders increased due to developments in the domestic and export markets. On
the other hand, it should be noted that the consumer confidence index and the
firms’ expectations of future investments, which have an important role in the
private sector consumption and investment demand, display an unfavorable
outlook.
8. The industrial production index, which increased in July, plunged in August and
therefore remained below the average of the previous quarter in the July-August
period. Figures pertaining to August are considered to fail to fully reflect the
underlying trend due to the religious holiday. Thus, it is assessed that the
seasonally and calendar-adjusted industrial production data should be handled
cautiously.
9. Recently data suggest that exports continue to grow at a moderate pace. The
exports volume index excluding gold recorded a mild increase in the July-August
period compared to the average of the previous quarter. The import demand from
the Euro area, which is the leading trade partner, has recently exhibited a
recovery following a protracted sluggish course. Moreover, PMI indicators reveal
a recovery on a global scale. Therefore, external demand conditions are expected
to support exports in the upcoming period.
10. Data regarding foreign trade and the current account balance are in line with
expectations. In 12-month cumulative terms, imports excluding gold follow a flat
course, while exports excluding gold remain on a mild increasing track. Against
this background, in spite of the expected increase in the annual cumulative
current account deficit due to the base effect from the gold trade in the short term,
it is anticipated that gradual improvement in the current account balance
excluding gold trade will continue.

11. Due to the slowdown in non-farm employment, seasonally-adjusted
unemployment rates displayed an increase in the July 2013 period. Most of the
subcategories, primarily the construction sector employment, posted a decline in
this period. The PMI employment index and the data regarding employment
expectation signal that the decline in employment may lose pace from September.
In addition, uncertainty regarding the global economy remains as a risk factor that
may restrain investment and employment growth in the forthcoming period.
Monetary Policy and Risks
12. The Committee assessed the medium term projections prepared for the October
Inflation Report. It is stated that annual consumer inflation in the third quarter of
2013 realized above the July forecasts due to a weaker Turkish lira and higher
unprocessed food prices. Exchange rate developments affect core inflation via
prices of core goods. Overall, given the assumptions underlying the inflation
forecasts and external conditions, the end-2013 inflation forecast was revised
upwards mainly on account of the developments in the exchange rate, oil prices
and output gap. These developments are expected to be temporary and have a
more limited effect on end-2014 inflation.
13. Inflation is expected to fall further in the forthcoming period. However, core
inflation indicators are likely to hover above the inflation target for some time and
the impact of these developments on pricing behavior is closely monitored. The
Committee has indicated that it will maintain the cautious monetary policy stance
and continue implementing additional monetary tightening at the appropriate
frequency until the medium term inflation outlook is in line with the medium term
targets.
14. Recent data suggest that final domestic demand and exports continue to grow at
a moderate pace. The present policy framework is contributing to the
improvement in the current account balance. The cautious monetary policy
stance, the macroprudential measures undertaken and weak capital flows will
gradually bring down the loan growth rates to more reasonable levels.
Accordingly, a gradual decline in the current account deficit excluding the gold
trade is expected to continue.
15. Financial markets have recently exhibited increased uncertainty mainly stemming
from global monetary policies. This increased uncertainty prompted a re-pricing of
all financial assets including exchange rates; and the weight of emerging
economies in global portfolio investments posted a decline. Against this
background, monetary policy adopted a cautious stance with a view to balance
macro financial risks and to restrain the deterioration in the inflation outlook. In

addition, predictability of the monetary policy was increased in order to restrain
the effects of global volatilities on the Turkish economy. The Committee has
stated that the rise in the predictability of the monetary policy will continue
gradually in the forthcoming period.
16. In the case of uncertainties regarding global monetary policies alleviating in the
upcoming months, both advanced and emerging economies might be favorably
affected. In that case, capital flows to emerging economies are likely to reaccelerate. The Committee has indicated that materialization of such a scenario
may prompt the Central Bank to take steps towards accumulating foreign
exchange reserves.
17. On the other hand, in the case of aggravation of uncertainties regarding global
monetary policies, there may be consequences on global liquidity, capital flows
and the pricing of financial assets. In that case, capital flows to emerging
economies are likely to remain weak, which may pose a risk to the inflation
outlook. The Committee has stated that in the materialization of such a scenario,
the Central Bank may start implementing additional monetary tightening for longer
periods to enhance price stability.
18. Food and energy prices are among other factors to pose risks to inflation
forecasts. The correction in the unprocessed food prices remained below
expectations in the third quarter. Thus, unprocessed food prices, which followed a
high course in the first three quarters in comparison with past averages, pose an
upside risk to the inflation outlook. Energy prices are assumed to preserve the
rather favorable course compared to recent years in the rest of the year.
Nevertheless, cumulative effects of the depreciation of the Turkish lira and the
international oil price developments pose an upside risk on administered energy
prices, albeit limited.
19. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments and tax adjustments closely
with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline monetary policy
stance takes the fiscal framework outlined in the Medium Term Program as given.
Accordingly, it is assumed that fiscal discipline will be sustained and there will be
no unanticipated hikes in administered prices. A revision in the monetary policy
stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this
framework and consequently have an adverse effect on the medium-term inflation
outlook.
20. Prudent fiscal and financial sector policies are crucial for preserving the resilience
of our economy against existing global imbalances. Strengthening the structural
reform agenda that will ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce

the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability in the medium-term. This
will also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and improve social welfare by
keeping interest rates of long-term government securities persistently at low
levels. In this respect, implementation of the structural reforms outlined by the
Medium Term Program remains to be of utmost importance.

