No: 2013 -07                                                                                           19 February 2013    
 DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: February 19 , 2013 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Erdem Başçı  (Governor), Ahmet  Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç , Necati Şahin, 
Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu .  
 
 
The Monetary Policy Com mittee (the Committee) has decided to adjust the short term 
interest rates as follows:  
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) has been kept at 5.5 percent.  
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate has been cut from 4.75 percent to 4. 50 
percent while lending rate has been cut from 8.75 percent  to 8.50 percent . Interest rate 
on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via repo transactions has been cut 
from 8.25 percent  to 8 percent . 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.):  Borrowing 
rate has been kept at 0 percent while lending rate has been cut from  11.75 percent  to 
11.50 percent . 
 
Recent data confirm th at the r ebalancing between the domestic and external demand 
continues as envisaged. Domestic  demand  follows  a mode rate pace while e xports continue to 
increase despite weak global activity . Overall , current account deficit  continues to decline  
gradually . 
The Committee has indicated that credit growth displays  a significant acceleration amid 
strong capital inflows. In order to  contain the risks on financial stability, the proper policy would 
be to keep interest rates at low levels while continuing with macroprudential measures. 
Accordingly, it was deemed appropriate to implement a measured tightening through reserve 
requirement s, while delivering a limited downward shift in the interest rate corridor.  
Ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy necessitate the monetary policy to 
remain flexible in both directions. Therefore, the impact of the measures undertaken on credit , 
domestic demand, and inflation expectations will be monitored closely and the funding amount 
will be adjusted in either direction, as needed.  
The Committee  has indicated that inflation will continue to fall despite the recent 
increase in oil prices . Core  inflation indicators are also expected to follow a mild course . In the 
meantime, t he impact of increases in administered prices on the pricing behavior will be 
monitored  closely.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to 
revise its stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five 
working days.  