No 2013 - 14

Release Date: 29 March 2013

SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING
Meeting Date: 26 March 2013

Inflation Developments
1. In February, consumer prices were up by 0.30 percent and annual inflation
decreased to 7.03 percent, which is attributed to food prices. Meanwhile, core
inflation indicators and prices of services remained on a mild track.
2. On the food and non-alcoholic beverages front, annual inflation went down to 5.60
percent. Annual unprocessed food inflation fell to 1.87 percent particularly due to
vegetable prices. Moreover, the deceleration in the monthly rate of increase in
processed food prices got more pronounced in this period. Although bread and
cereals group maintained rising prices in line with the domestic wheat prices
outlook, annual processed food inflation went down by 0.5 percentage points to
8.39 percent owing to the favorable course of other processed food products in
February. On the other hand, leading indicators point that annual unprocessed
food inflation will rise in March.
3. Energy prices increased by 0.64 percent in February, while the annual energy
inflation went down to 11.75 percent. Domestic fuel prices rose by 1.85 percent
upon the surge in international oil prices. Meanwhile, international oil prices in
March went back to the level projected in the January Inflation Report.
4. Annual services inflation crept up to 7.21 percent. Across subcategories, annual
inflation increased in communication and transport services; but remained
unchanged in rents, restaurants, hotels and other services. Meanwhile, both the
seasonally adjusted underlying trend and the diffusion index of the prices of
services edged up; yet the group’s prices remained on a mild track in February.
5. Inflation in core goods group rose by 0.14 percentage points to 4.46 percent.
Prices fell at a higher rate than seasonal averages in the clothing group; while
durable goods prices saw increases due to automobile and furniture prices. Thus,
annual durable goods inflation, which has been recently decreasing, went up in
February. Meanwhile, annual inflation in core goods excluding clothing and
durables maintained the downward trend. Overall, seasonally adjusted data
indicates that the underlying trends of core inflation indicators maintained their
relatively mild track.

Factors Affecting Inflation
6. Data regarding the first quarter of 2013 suggests that economic activity continues
to improve. Industrial production increased on a monthly basis in January,
partially compensating the decline in December. Both the course of automobiles
and white goods sales and credit data indicate that the domestic demand is on an
upward track. Survey indicators signal that a healthy recovery has started in final
domestic demand due to a revival in both investment and consumption demand.
7. Recent data pertaining to the current account balance and foreign trade are as
envisaged. Notwithstanding the sluggish global growth, the underlying trend of
exports displays a relatively positive outlook owing to the product and market
diversification. On account of the rebound in domestic demand, imports exhibit a
marked increase. This leads to some widening in the current account deficit. The
Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has assessed that the current policy
framework will contain the deterioration in the current account balance.
8. Seasonally adjusted non-farm employment continued to increase, albeit at a
slower pace, in December 2012. However, unemployment rates edged up due to
higher labor force participation rates. The rise in the non-farm employment in this
period was triggered mainly by the industrial sector, which settled on a trend of
recovery in the last quarter of 2012. In line with the rebound in economic activity,
employment is expected to increase gradually in the forthcoming period.
Nevertheless, uncertainties regarding the global economy may restrain
investment and employment growth in the forthcoming period.

Monetary Policy and Risks
9. During the early months of the year, financial conditions have improved markedly
with the impetus from strong capital inflows, and consequently credit growth has
hovered above the reference rates. The Committee has assessed that first
quarter credit growth suggests a trend faster than the reference rate of 15 percent
which is deemed as healthy for Turkey.
10. Following the heightened global uncertainty, capital inflows have decelerated in
the recent period. Ongoing policy uncertainty in advanced economies and
problems in the Euro area have led to a slowdown in capital inflows, once again
increasing the volatility.
11. The Committee has decided to increase the effectiveness of the Reserve Options
Mechanism (ROM) gradually in response to the heightened volatility in capital
inflows. The Committee indicated that, in order to enhance the automatic
stabilizer effect of the mechanism, the coefficients should be adjusted upwards
and a new tranche should be added to the existing scheme. More effective

utilization of the ROM reduces the need for a wider interest rate corridor. In this
respect, the interest rate corridor was made more symmetric by cutting the
overnight lending rates by 100 basis points.
12. Ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy necessitate the monetary
policy to remain flexible in both directions. Therefore, the impact of the measures
undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and inflation expectations will be
monitored closely and the funding amount will be adjusted in either direction, as
needed. The Committee stated that liquidity management will be more important
in the forthcoming period. Accordingly, the share of one-month funding was
decreased in order to tighten the liquidity conditions to some extent.
13. The Committee foresees that tighter liquidity policy along with the weaker capital
inflows will slow down the credit growth. Necessary measures will be taken
through liquidity policy, ROM, and reserve requirements should the capital inflows
re-accelerate.
14. Weakening global demand and the commodity price outlook contain the upside
risks on inflation. The fragile outlook of global economy exerts downward
pressures on energy and base metal prices. Moreover, recent developments
suggest that the recovery in the Euro area—our largest trade destination, may be
weaker than expected. All these developments contain the upward pressures on
inflation. In the meantime, the impact of increases in credit and domestic demand
on the pricing behavior will be monitored closely.
15. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments and tax adjustments closely,
with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. In the setting of monetary
policy, the framework outlined in the Medium Term Program is taken as given. In
this respect, it is assumed that fiscal discipline will be sustained and there will be
no unanticipated hikes in administered prices. A revision in the monetary policy
stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this
framework and consequently have an adverse effect on the medium-term inflation
outlook.
16. Prudent fiscal and financial sector policies are crucial for preserving the resilience
of our economy against existing global imbalances. Strengthening the structural
reform agenda that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and
reduce the savings deficit would support macroeconomic stability in the mediumterm. This will also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and improve social
welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term government securities persistently
at low levels. In this respect, steps towards implementation of the structural
reforms envisaged by the Medium Term Program remain to be of utmost
importance.

