DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: May 16, 2013 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Erdem Başçı  (Governor), Ahmet  Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç , Necati Şahin, 
Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu .  
 
 
The Monetary Policy Committe e (the Committee) has decided to cut the short term 
interest rates as follows:  
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) has been cut from 5 percent  to 4.5 percent . 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate has been cut from  4 percent to 3.5 percent 
while lendin g rate has been cut from 7 percent  to 6.5 percent . Interest rate on borrowing 
facilities provided for primary dealers via repo transactions has been cut from 6.5 
percent  to 6 percent . 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Bo rrowing 
rate has been kept at 0 percent while lending rate has been cut from  10 percent  to 9.5 
percent . 
 
Recent data suggest that domestic and external demand are evolv ing in line with 
expectations . Domestic  demand  follows  a healthy recovery while e xports slow down due to 
weak global economic activity . The current policy framework and the decline in commodity 
prices limit the impact of the increasing economic activity on the  current account deficit.  
Capital inflows  remain strong and credit growth hover s above the reference rate. The 
Committee indicated that, i n order to balance the risks on financial stability, the proper policy 
would be to keep interest rates low while increasing foreign currency reserves via 
macroprudential measures . Accordingly, it was de emed appropriate to implement a measured 
tightening via reserve requirements and  reserve options coefficients , while delivering a  cut in the 
short term interest rates .  
Ongoing u ncertainties regarding the global economy and the volatility in capital flows 
necessitate the monetary policy to remain flexible in both directions. Therefore, the impact of the 
measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and inflation expectations will be monitored 
closely and the funding amount will be adjusted in either direc tion, as needed.  
The Committee  has indicated that the weak global demand and the commodity price 
outlook contain the upward pressures on inflation . In the meantime, t he impact of increases in 
credit and domestic demand on the pricing behavior will be monitored  closely.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to 
revise its stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five 
working days.  No: 2013 – 20 Release Date: 16  May 2013 