No: 2013 – 43
Release Date: 27 August 2013
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING
Meeting Date: 20 August 2013

Inflation Developments
1. In July, consumer prices edged up by 0.31 percent and annual inflation reached
8.88 percent. This uptick was attributed to the base effect besides the recent
depreciation in the Turkish lira. Meanwhile, the underlying trend of core inflation
indicators exhibited an increase.
2. On the food front, annual inflation edged down to 12.72 percent. As for the
unprocessed food group, upon the rising meat prices despite falling prices in fresh
fruits and vegetables, annual inflation remained unchanged on a monthly basis.
On the other hand, annual processed food inflation receded further due to the
favorable course of the prices excluding bread and cereals. Under the current
outlook, cumulative increase of unprocessed food prices across 2013 hovers
above the averages of past periods. Leading indicators point to a downward
course in the group’s annual inflation.
3. Energy prices went up owing to the depreciation in the Turkish lira coupled with
increasing oil prices. Due to the base effect, the annual energy inflation is
envisaged to considerably decline as of August.
4. Prices of services went up by 0.79 percent, and annual services inflation reached
7.97 percent in July, which was attributed to communication and other services.
Seasonally adjusted data suggest that the underlying trend of services inflation
remained on an upward course in July.
5. Annual inflation in core goods group went up by around 1 percentage point to
4.23 percent in July. The depreciation in the Turkish lira pushed up the annual
inflation in durable goods. Meanwhile, annual inflation in other subcategories of
core goods remained on a downward track. As a result, the seasonally-adjusted
trend of increase in core goods recorded an uptick. Given this outlook of services
and core goods, the underlying trend of core inflation indicators trended upwards
as well.
6. In sum, while inflation is expected to start falling from August onwards as
envisaged, pricing behavior is closely monitored.

Factors Affecting Inflation
7. Recent data suggest that domestic and external demand developments are in line
with expectations. In the second quarter, increases in production and imports of
consumption and investment goods continued with lower increases compared to
the first quarter, while sales of automobiles and credit growth maintained their
robust trends. Triggered also by rising exports excluding gold, industrial
production maintained a steady trend of increase in the second quarter. On the
other hand, uncertainties regarding global economic policies besides the volatility
in capital flows fuel the downside risks in the third quarter. Supporting this,
indicators of the Business Tendency Survey and PMI in July reveal receding
figures compared to the averages of the second quarter.
8. Data regarding foreign trade and the current account balance are in line with
expectations. Gradual improvement in the current account deficit, excluding gold
trade, continues. The current policy framework, with the additional support from
recent macroprudential policies, will continue to improve the current account
balance. Accordingly, the deterioration in demand components, which appeared
in the first half of the year, is expected to start improving by the third quarter.
9. According to the seasonally adjusted data, non-farm employment remained on a
steadily increasing track in the May 2013 period. Nevertheless, the ratio of the
non-farm labor force to the working age population increased more, resulting in
the total and non-farm unemployment rates to increase compared to the previous
period. While the recent rise in non-farm employment was mainly driven by the
industrial sector besides the services sector, employment in the construction
sector exhibited a decline. Total Employment Expectation, among the CBRT
Business Tendency Survey indicators and the PMI Employment Index signal that
industrial employment will continue to increase in the third quarter, albeit at a
decelerating pace. Yet, uncertainty regarding the global economy remains as a
risk factor that may restrain investment and employment growth in the
forthcoming period.
Monetary Policy and Risks
10. Recent volatilities in financial markets were discussed in the meeting.
Developments regarding global monetary policies since May have been leading to
the re-pricing of all financial assets. Lingering uncertainties particularly in the
monetary policies of developed economies fuel the volatility in financial markets.
In line with these developments, the weight of emerging market assets in global
portfolio investments is observed to decrease. Although economic fundamentals
are supposed to determine capital movements in the medium and long-term,

uncertainties in monetary policies stemming from developed economies lead to
financial fluctuations.
11. The Euro area survived the recession and posted positive growth figures in the
second quarter, which is considered to be favorable for the current account
balance. Nevertheless, the recently-released data suggest that the global
economy has not settled into a stable growth trend yet. Due to the unstable
outlook regarding the global economic activity coupled with the uncertainties
regarding the monetary policies of developed economies, future capital flows are
envisaged to remain volatile. Against this backdrop, the Committee assessed that
it is important to maintain the flexibility of the Turkish lira liquidity management. To
this end, developments regarding price stability and financial stability will be
closely monitored and necessary adjustments will be made in the composition of
Turkish lira liquidity provided by the Central Bank.
12. Credit growth rates continue to hover above the reference rate. The recentlyweakening capital flows and the recent macroprudential measures are expected
to restrain credit growth rates. In such a conjuncture , the Committee assessed
that being also supported by the cautious monetary policy stance, credit growth
rates would gradually go down to more plausible levels. This gradual slowdown in
the credit growth rate will not only improve the current account deficit, but also
support financial stability.
13. The high course of unprocessed food prices, the base effect from energy prices
and the effects of exchange rate movements led the inflation to high figures as
expected. Inflation is expected to start falling from August onwards as envisaged.
Yet, in order to contain the adverse impact of the above-target inflation indicators
on the pricing behavior, the Committee has decided to strengthen the cautious
stance of the monetary policy. The cautious stance will be maintained until the
inflation outlook is in line with the medium term targets. In this respect, additional
monetary tightening will be implemented whenever needed. In order to increase
the effectiveness of the additional monetary tightening, the Committee has
decided to raise the overnight lending rate from 7.25 percent to 7.75 percent.
14. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments and tax adjustments closely
with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline monetary policy
stance takes the fiscal framework outlined in the Medium Term Program as given.
In this respect, it is assumed that fiscal discipline will be sustained and there will
be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices. A revision in the monetary policy
stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this
framework and consequently have an adverse effect on the medium-term inflation
outlook.

15. Prudent fiscal and financial sector policies are crucial for preserving the resilience
of our economy against existing global imbalances. Strengthening the structural
reform agenda that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and
reduce the savings deficit would support macroeconomic stability in the mediumterm. This will also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and improve social
welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term government securities persistently
at low levels. In this respect, implementation of the structural reforms envisaged
by the Medium Term Program remains to be of utmost importance.

