DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: November 19, 2013 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu.  
 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to keep the short term 
interest rates constant at the following levels: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Lending rate at 7.75 p ercent, borrowing rate at 3.5 percent, 
and the interest rate on borrowing facilities provi ded for primary dealers via repo 
transactions at 6.75 percent, 
b) One-week repo rate at 4.5 percent, 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing 
rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 10.25 percent. 
 
Data released since the last meeting suggest that f inal domestic demand and exports 
continue to grow at a moderate pace. The present po licy framework is contributing to the 
improvement in the current account balance. The cau tious monetary policy stance, recently 
announced macroprudential measures, and weak capita l flows will bring down the loan growth 
rates to more reasonable levels. Accordingly, moder ate decline in the current account deficit 
excluding gold trade is expected to continue. 
Inflation indicators are likely to hover above the inflation target for some time due to the 
exchange rate volatility observed during the recent  months. In order to contain the impact of 
these developments on the pricing behavior, the Com mittee decided to strengthen the cautious 
stance and reduce the volatility of short term mone y market rates. To this end, one month repo 
auctions will be terminated, as a result of which i nterbank money market rates will materialize 
around 7.75 percent. The Committee stated that the cautious monetary policy stance should be 
maintained until the inflation outlook is in line w ith the medium term targets. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to 
revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five 
working days. No: 2013 – 58  Release Date: 19  November  201 3