No: 2013-11

Release Date: 26 March 2013

DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
Meeting Date: March 26, 2013
Participating Committee Members
Erdem Başçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin,
Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu.

The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to adjust the short term
interest rates as follows:
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) has been kept at 5.5 percent.
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate has been kept constant at 4.50 percent
while lending rate has been cut from 8.50 percent to 7.50 percent. Interest rate on
borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via repo transactions has been cut from
8 percent to 7 percent.
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing
rate has been kept at 0 percent while lending rate has been cut from 11.50 percent to
10.50 percent.
Recent data suggest that domestic and external demand are evolving in line with
expectations. Domestic demand follows a healthy recovery while exports remain relatively
strong despite weak global economic activity. The current account deficit is expected to
increase somewhat in the forthcoming period following the revival in domestic demand.
However, the current policy framework is expected contain the widening in the current account
deficit.
Credit growth has been hovering above the reference rates during the early months of
the year amid strong capital inflows. However, there is a deceleration in capital inflows in the
recent period. The Committee has decided to increase the effectiveness of the Reserve Options
Mechanism gradually in response to the heightened volatility in capital inflows. The automatic
stabilizer effect of this mechanism reduces the need for a wider interest rate corridor. In this
respect, the interest rate corridor was made more symmetric by cutting the overnight lending
rates by 100 basis points.
Ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy necessitate the monetary policy to
remain flexible in both directions. Therefore, the impact of the measures undertaken on credit,
domestic demand, and inflation expectations will be monitored closely and the funding amount
will be adjusted in either direction, as needed.
The Committee has indicated that weak global demand and the commodity price outlook
contains the upward pressures on inflation. In the meantime, the impact of increases in credit
and domestic demand on the pricing behavior will be monitored closely.
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to
revise its stance.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five
working days.

