 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: April 1 6, 2013 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Erdem Başçı  (Governor), Ahmet  Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç , Necati Şahin, 
Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu .  
 
 
The Monetary Policy Commit tee (the Committee) has decided to cut the short term 
interest rates as follows:  
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) has been cut from 5.5 percent  to 5 percent . 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate has been cut from  4.50 percent to 4 percent 
while len ding rate has been cut from 7.50 percent  to 7 percent . Interest rate on 
borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via repo transactions has been cut from 
7 percent  to 6.5 percent . 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.) : Borrowing 
rate has been kept at 0 percent while lending rate has been cut from  10.50 percent  to 10 
percent . 
 
Recent data suggest that domestic and external demand are evolv ing in line with 
expectations . Domestic  demand  follows  a healthy recovery while e xports slow down due to 
weak global economic activity . The c urrent account deficit  has increase d somewhat following 
the revival in domestic demand . However, the current policy framework and the decline in 
commodity prices are  expected contain the widening i n the current account deficit.  
Recently, there is a re -acceleration in capital inflows  and credit growth hover s above the 
reference rate. The Committee indicated that, i n order to balance the risks on financial stability, 
the proper policy would be to keep  interest rates low while increasing foreign currency reserves 
via macroprudential measures . Accordingly, it was deemed appropriate to further increase  the 
reserve options coefficients , while delivering a  cut in the short term interest rates .  
Ongoing u ncertainties regarding the global economy and the volatility in capital flows 
necessitate the monetary policy to remain flexible in both directions. Therefore, the impact of the 
measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and inflation expectations will b e monitored 
closely and the funding amount will be adjusted in either direction, as needed.  
The Committee  has indicated that the weak global demand and the commodity price 
outlook contain the upward pressures on inflation . In the meantime, t he impact of increases in 
credit and domestic demand on the pricing behavior will be monitored  closely.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to 
revise its stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be rele ased within five 
working days.  No: 2013 – 16 Release Date: 16 April  2013 