No: 2013 – 10

Release Date: 26 February 2013

SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING
Meeting Date: 19 February 2013

Inflation Developments
1. In January, consumer prices were up by 1.65 percent and annual inflation
increased to 7.31 percent. As also stated in the summary of the previous
Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) Meeting, this is attributed to the tax
adjustment in tobacco products and the rise in unprocessed food prices, which
added around 1.5 percentage points to annual inflation in January. On the other
hand, core inflation indicators and prices of services remained on a relatively mild
track.
2. On the food and non-alcoholic beverages front, annual inflation went up to 6.85
percent. Vegetable prices soared by 21.4 percent amid adverse weather
conditions in January, pushing the annual unprocessed food inflation considerably
upwards. On the other hand, annual processed food inflation decreased. Across
subcategories, bread and cereals group maintained rising prices; whereas price
increases in other processed food products lost pace in January.
3. Energy prices edged up in January, while the annual energy inflation went down
to 11.90 percent with base effects. On the other hand, international oil prices
presently remain above the level projected in the January Inflation Report.
4. Annual services inflation remained unchanged on a monthly basis. Annual
inflation declined in transport services; contrary to a slight increase in other
subcategories of services. However, both the seasonally adjusted underlying
trend and the diffusion index of the prices of services edged down and indicated
that prices of services remained on a mild track.
5. Inflation in core goods group edged down in January. As the seasonal sale in the
clothing group in the last two months lagged behind that in the previous year, the
annual rate of price increase trended upwards. Meanwhile, annual inflation in
subcategories excluding clothing maintained their downward trend.
6. Consequently, the Committee has indicated that core inflation indicators are
expected to follow a mild course and inflation will continue to fall despite the
recent increase in oil prices.

Factors Affecting Inflation
7. Industrial production data regarding the last quarter of 2012 suggests a weakerthan-expected economic activity. The Committee indicated that the recovery in
the domestic demand has not been reflected in the industrial production data yet,
which may be explained by the ongoing inventory depletion. In fact, surveys
regarding the industrial sector point to a fall in the stocks of final products during
the last quarter.
8. Data pertaining to the last quarter of 2012 on the current account and foreign
trade confirm that the rebalancing between the domestic and external demand
continues as envisaged. In spite of the sluggish global growth, exports continued
to increase owing to market and product diversification. Meanwhile, the increase
in imports maintained its mild course. Accordingly, the 12-month cumulative
current account deficit continued to decline.
9. The Committee highlighted that domestic demand and imports may gradually gain
momentum as of the first quarter of 2013. Recently-released data on automobile
sales, foreign trade, credits, consumer confidence index and expectations for
orders obtained from surveys have pointed to a remarkable uptick in domestic
demand stemming both from consumption and investment demand.
10. Seasonally adjusted employment continued to increase in November 2012.
However, unemployment increased slightly due to higher labor force participation
rates. The recent increase in non-farm employment was triggered mainly by the
services sector, while employment in the industrial sector remained weak amid
the developments in production. A similar pattern is expected to prevail in
December, while employment growth is expected to be more broad- based
starting from early 2013. Nevertheless, uncertainties regarding the global
economy may restrain employment and investment growth in the forthcoming
period.
Monetary Policy and Risks
11. The Committee has assessed that the expansionary impact of the monetary
stimulus provided during the second half of 2012 will be visible in the forthcoming
period. In this respect, it is expected that final domestic demand will increase
markedly in the first quarter, and the recovery will be reflected in the production
more strongly starting from the second quarter.
12. The Committee has indicated that low level of capacity utilization rate contains the
upside pressures on inflation, notwithstanding the revival in economic activity.
Accordingly, inflation is expected to continue to fall despite the elevated levels of
oil prices. Core inflation indicators are also expected to follow a mild course.

In the meantime, the impact of increases in administered prices on the pricing
behavior will be monitored closely.
13. The Committee indicated that credit growth displayed a significant acceleration in
the past three months due to strong capital inflows. Moreover, the Committee
stated that capital inflows during this period increased the appreciation pressures
on the domestic currency. Therefore, in order to contain the risks on financial
stability, the proper policy would be to keep interest rates at low levels while
continuing with macroprudential measures.
14. The Committee has indicated that cutting the lower bound of the interest rate
corridor will limit the appreciation pressures on the Turkish lira and thus contain
macro financial risks. Moreover, improving risk appetite, declining interest rates in
emerging markets, and more effective implementation of the Reserve Options
Mechanism allows a downward adjustment in the upper bound of the interest rate
corridor. Meanwhile, it would be useful to increase reserve requirements in order
to bring credit growth to more reasonable levels. In light of these assessments, it
was deemed appropriate to implement a measured tightening through reserve
requirements, while delivering a limited downward shift in the interest rate
corridor.
15. The Committee indicated that, although global risk perceptions have improved
considerably in the recent period, persisting volatility in the cross border capital
flows necessitate monetary policy to be flexible on both sides. Ongoing monetary
expansion in advanced economies and increasing global risk appetite have been
leading to strong capital flows towards emerging markets. Nevertheless, the
deleveraging process in advanced economies may impede the recovery in the
economic activity and thus slow down the improvement in the budget balances. In
fact, despite the steps taken to resolve the problems in the euro area, outlook for
credit markets and economic growth remain weak, and debt sustainability
concerns continue. Meanwhile, uncertainty indices regarding the economic policy
in major advanced economies are still at high levels. In light of these
assessments, the Committee stated that ongoing uncertainties regarding the
global economy necessitate the monetary policy to remain flexible in both
directions. Therefore, the impact of the measures taken regarding credit, domestic
demand, and inflation expectations will be monitored closely and the funding
amount will be adjusted in either direction, as needed.
16. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments and tax adjustments closely,
with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. In the setting of monetary
policy, the framework outlined in the Medium Term Program is taken as given. In
this respect, it is assumed that fiscal discipline will be sustained and there will be
no unanticipated hikes in administered prices. A revision in the monetary policy
stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this

framework and consequently have an adverse effect on the medium-term inflation
outlook.
17. Prudent fiscal and financial sector policies are crucial for preserving the resilience
of our economy against existing global imbalances. Strengthening the structural
reform agenda that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and
reduce the savings deficit would support macroeconomic stability in the mediumterm. This will also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and improve social
welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term government securities persistently
at low levels. In this respect, steps towards implementation of the structural
reforms envisaged by the Medium Term Program remain to be of utmost
importance.

