No: 2013 - 50         Release Date: 24 September 2013  
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: 17 September 2013  
 
Inflation Developments   
1. In August , consumer prices edged down  by 0.1 0 percent and annual inflation 
receded to 8.17 percent, which was attributed to unprocessed food and energy 
prices. Food and energy groups added 0.9 percentage points less  to the annual 
inflation compared to July. Due to the recent d epreciation in the Turkish lira , core 
inflation indicators exhibited a  slight  increase.  
2. Annual inflati on in the food group went  down to 1 0.25 percent. The unprocessed 
food group  saw falling inflation amid plunging  prices of fresh fruits and vegetables . 
On the processed food front , despite the decelerating course of the prices of 
bread and cereals , annual i nflation reached  8.32 percent upon  rising  price s of 
other processed food products . Leading indicators point to a further downward 
movement  in the annual unprocessed inflation in September.  
3. Energy prices went up owing to the depreciation of the Turkish lir a coupled with 
increasing oil prices. Nevertheless, the annual energy inflation declined due to the 
base effect in A ugust.  Similarly, the annual energy inflation is envisioned to 
decline further in September, despite the persisting rise in fuel and bottled  gas 
prices.  
4. Prices of services edged  up by 0. 61 percent, and the annual services inflation 
reached 8 .18 percent in August.  Seasonally adjusted data suggest that the 
underlying trend of services inflation remained on a high track as well. Annual 
inflation in the core goods group climbed to 4.58 percent in August. Durable 
goods prices continued  to rise , while the seasonal price reduction in the clothing 
group remained below that in past years. In this framework , due to the 
depreciation of the Turkish lira, the seasonally -adjusted trend of increase in core 
goods prices followed an upward course . 
5. In sum, inflation is expected to fall  further in the upcoming period ; yet core 
inflation indicators are foreseen to remain above the target for a while.   
 
 Factors Aff ecting Inflation   
6. GDP exhibited a stronger -than-expected growth in the second quarter of 2013. 
Final domestic demand, which surged in the first quarter in seasonally -adjusted 
terms, remained flat in the second quarter. Meanwhile, the change in stocks 
contributed greatly both to the quarterly and annual growth. On the oth er hand, 
exports followed a milder course amid the weakening global demand.  Thus, 
aggregate demand conditions did not exert an upside pressure on inflation.  
7. Recent data suggest that final domestic demand and exports continue to grow at  
a moderate pace. Production and imports of consumption goods registered 
increases  in July on a quarterly basis , while available data on the sales of white 
goods and automobiles and credit utilization of the third quarter indicate an uptick 
in consumption demand. Imports of capital goods and production of capital goods 
excluding vehicles besides the production of other non-metallic minerals display a 
sluggish outlook in investments. Industrial production in  July posted higher figures 
compared to  the average of the previous quarter. I ndicators of the PMI, the 
Business Tendency Survey and leading export s data reveal a mild recovery 
across the third quarter .  
8. Data regarding foreign trade and the current account balance are in line with 
expectations. Despite an expected increase in the annual cumulative current 
account deficit due to the base ef fect from the gold trade  in the short term , it is 
anticipated that gradual improvement in the current account balance excluding 
gold trade will continue.  
9. Due to the slowdown  in non -farm employment, t he seasonally adjusted 
unemployment displayed an increase in the June 2013 period. Most of the 
subcategories, primarily the industrial sector  employment , exhibited a decline  in 
this period . Total Employment Expectation, among the CBRT Business Tendency 
Survey indicators , and the PMI Employment Index signal that industrial 
employment may remain weak . In addition , uncertainty regarding the global 
economy remains as a risk factor that may restrain investment and employment 
growth in the forthcoming period.   
 
Monetary Policy and  Risk s 
10. Inflation is expected to fall further in the forthcoming period. The Committee 
indicated that, u nder the assumptions of no additional adjustments in 
administered prices and the continuation of benign trend in unprocessed food 
prices, year -end inflation is likely to be close to the forecast presented at the July Inflation Report. However, core inflati on indicators are likely to hover above the 
inflation target for some time due to the exchange rate volatility observed during 
the recent months. The impact of these developments on the pricing behavior is 
closely monitored. Therefore, the Committee stated  that the cautious monetary 
policy stance will be maintained and additional monetary tightening will be 
implemented at the appropriate frequency until the medium term inflation outlook 
is in line with the medium term targets.  
11. The current policy framework i s improving the current account balance. The 
weakness in capital flows, cautious monetary policy stance and the 
macroprudential measures undertaken will gradually bring down the loan growth 
rates to more reasonable levels. Accordingly, gradual decline in t he current 
account deficit excluding gold trade is expected to continue.  
12. According to the Committee, increasing the predictability of the Turkish lira 
liquidity policy is important in order to contain the repercussions of uncertainties in 
global monetary p olicies on the domestic economy. It was underlined that 
fluctuations in financial markets in this period largely reflect  a “re-pricing” effect. 
Thus, the strategy to reduce policy rate uncertainty contribute s greatly to the 
prevention of the economy from being dragged into a  vicious circle that is not 
driven by economic fundamentals. In fact, it was expressed that , following a 
clearer signal regarding the monetary policy, the sensitivity of domestic policy 
rates to global rates has weakened to a large extent and recently market rates 
rather respond to domestic macroeconomic developments, as they should.  
13. Recent developments have shown that global economy continues to be fragile. 
Therefore, d evelopments regarding  price stability and financial stability will be 
closely monitored and necessary adjustments will continue to be made in the 
composition of Turkish lira liquidity provided by the Central Bank.  
14. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments and tax adjus tments closely 
with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline monetary policy 
stance takes the fiscal framework outlined in the Medium Term Program as given. 
Accordingly, it is assumed that fiscal discipline will be sustained and there  will be 
no unanticipated hikes in administered prices. A revision in the monetary policy 
stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this 
framework and consequently have an adverse effect on the medium -term inflation 
outlook. 
15. Prudent fiscal and financial sector policies are crucial for preserving the resilience 
of our economy against existing global imbalances. Strengthening the structural 
reform agenda that will ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduc e the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability in the medium -term. This 
will also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and improve social welfare by 
keeping interest rates of long -term government securities persistently at low 
levels. I n this respect, implementation of the structural reforms outlined by the 
Medium Term Program remains to be of utmost importance.  
 