No: 2013 – 55
Release Date: 23 October 2013

DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
Meeting Date: October 23, 2013
Participating Committee Members
Erdem Başçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati
Şahin, Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu.

The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to keep the short
term interest rates constant at the following levels:
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 4.5 percent,
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 3.5 percent, lending rate at 7.75
percent, and the interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers
via repo transactions at 6.75 percent.
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.):
Borrowing rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 10.25 percent.
Recent data suggest that final domestic demand and exports continue to grow at
a moderate pace. The present policy framework is contributing to the improvement in
the current account balance. The cautious monetary policy stance, the macroprudential
measures undertaken and weak capital flows will gradually bring down the loan growth
rates to more reasonable levels. Accordingly, gradual decline in the current account
deficit excluding gold trade is expected to continue.
Inflation is expected to fall further in the forthcoming period. However, core
inflation indicators are likely to hover above the inflation target for some time due to the
exchange rate volatility observed during the recent months. The impact of these
developments on the pricing behavior is closely monitored. The Committee will maintain
the cautious monetary policy stance and continue implementing additional monetary
tightening at the appropriate frequency until the medium term inflation outlook is in line
with the medium term targets.
Developments regarding price stability and financial stability will be closely
monitored and necessary adjustments will continue to be made in the composition of
Turkish lira liquidity provided by the Central Bank. Meanwhile, in order to contain the
repercussions of uncertainties in global monetary policies on the domestic economy,
maintaining the increased predictability of the Turkish lira liquidity policy is deemed
important.
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the
Committee to revise its stance.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within
five working days.

