 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 22 January 2013 
   
  Inflation Developments 
1. In December, consumer prices were up by 0.38 percent  and annual inflation went 
down to 6.16 percent. Thus, the year-end CPI inflatio n hit the lowest level of the 
last 44 years. Unprocessed food prices continued to support  the decline in annual 
consumer inflation. Core inflation indicators remained mild amid cost and 
demand-side developments.  
2. On the food and non-alcoholic beverages front, year -end annual inflation was 
3.90 percent, which was significantly lower than past ye ar averages. This was 
mainly driven by unprocessed food prices, the annual inf lation of which went 
down to -2.78 percent upon falling vegetable prices. L eading indicators point that 
the favorable trend in unprocessed food prices will rev erse in January and the 
group’s annual inflation will register notable increase s. As for the processed food 
group, parallel to the uptrend in domestic wheat pri ces, bread and cereals group 
maintains rising prices; whereas annual inflation in it ems excluding breads and 
cereals continues to decelerate. 
3. Annual services inflation remained at 7 percent. Acro ss subcategories, 
communication services and rents registered rising inflatio n rates. However, 
recording the lowest last-quarter-rise of recent years, r estaurants-hotels and 
transport services exhibited a decline in annual inflati on. Both the seasonally-
adjusted underlying trend and the diffusion index of the prices of services edged 
down and pointed that prices of services remained on a mild track.  
4. Annual inflation in core goods group followed a fl at course compared to the 
previous month and completed the year with 4.5 percen t. The main driver of the 
deceleration in core goods inflation across the year was d urable goods prices, 
which went up merely by 0.17 percent in 2012. In the forthcoming period, core 
goods inflation is expected to maintain its decelerating  trend due to the prices of 
clothing and other core goods, which are core goods exclud ing durables. 
Seasonally adjusted data show that the relatively mild  pace in the underlying 
trend of core inflation indicators continued despite the  rise in December.  
5. Overall, the Committee has indicated that inflatio n may increase slightly in 
January due to adjustments in tobacco prices, but will resu me its downward trend 
afterwards. Core inflation indicators are expected to co ntinue their downward 
trend. No: 2013  – 4 Release date:  29 January 2013  Factors Affecting Inflation  
6. Data regarding the fourth quarter of 2012 indicat ed that economic activity is in a trend 
of recovery. Increase in industrial production partially compensated for the decline 
in October and production remained above the third-q uarter level in the October-
November period. The Committee highlighted that ann ual growth rates continue 
to display notable fluctuations. In fact, industrial pr oduction, which recorded two-
digit increases in November on an annual basis, is expecte d to exhibit a rather 
minor change in December on an annual basis. Meanwhile,  leading indicators 
point that production will increasingly get stronger in  the forthcoming period.  
7. Data on production, imports and surveys regarding invest ment demand, which 
have been one of the main drivers of the weak course of  the final domestic 
demand recently, signal for a recovery. Data related to consum ption demand 
indicate a mild increase in the private consumption demand. Due to the support of 
lagged effects of the accommodative monetary policy , the recovery in the final 
domestic demand is expected to continue in the first quart er. Recent acceleration in 
loan growth and domestic market orders also support this o utlook.   
8. Recently released data suggest that despite the weaken ing global growth, exports 
continue to increase on the back of market and product dive rsification. Imports, on 
the other hand, are expected to slightly accelerate in the forthcoming months due to 
the rise in domestic demand. However, the Committee est imates that the 
improvement in the 12-month cumulative current account deficit will continue, albeit 
at a slower pace.  
9. Seasonally adjusted unemployment rate declined upon  the rise in non-farm 
employment in October 2012. Rise in the non-farm emp loyment has mostly been 
driven by the services sector, while employment in the i ndustrial sector has remained 
weak recently. Furthermore, the employment expectation  data in the Business 
Tendency Survey and the PMI employment data signal f or improvements in 
employment conditions in the last quarter of 2012. Ot her leading indicators also 
signal that mild increases in non-farm employment will continue. However, 
uncertainties regarding the global economy remain to be critical factors that may 
restrain employment growth.  
Risks and Monetary Policy 
10. In the meeting, the Committee has assessed macroecono mic developments and 
forecasts to appear in the January Inflation Report. It was concluded that there is 
no major revision in the factors affecting inflation ou tlook, and thus year-end 
inflation forecast would be kept at 5.3 percent. It w as stated that core inflation 
indicators are expected to continue their downward tren d, yet the impact of 
increases in administered prices on the pricing behavior w ill be monitored closely. 11. Recent data confirm that the rebalancing between t he domestic and external 
demand continues as envisaged. Domestic demand follows a  moderate pace 
while exports continue to increase despite weak global act ivity. Overall, current 
account deficit continues to decline gradually. 
12. The Committee has indicated that the recent credit growth has been faster than 
envisaged. Developments regarding financial conditions su ch as rapid capital 
inflows, improving credit supply conditions, and accommoda tive monetary policy 
point to the risk of further acceleration in credit and domestic demand for the 
forthcoming period, necessitating a cautious stance against  macro financial risks.  
The Committee stated that, in order to contain the r isks on financial stability, the 
proper policy would be to keep interest rates at low le vels while continuing with 
macroprudential measures. Accordingly, it was deemed ap propriate to implement 
a measured tightening through reserve requirements, wh ile delivering a limited 
downward shift in the interest rate corridor. 
13. The Committee indicated that, although global ri sk perceptions have improved 
considerably in the recent period, persisting volatility  in the cross border capital 
flows necessitate monetary policy to be flexible on both sides. Ongoing monetary 
expansion in advanced economies, commitment to maintain this policy until 
economic indicators improve, and increasing global risk ap petite have been the 
major factors leading to an acceleration in capital flow s to emerging markets. 
Nevertheless, the deleveraging process in advanced econom ies may impede the 
recovery in the economic activity and thus slow down the im provement in the 
budget balances. In fact, despite the steps taken to resol ve the problems in the 
euro area, outlook for credit markets and economic growt h remain weak. 
Meanwhile, uncertainty indices regarding the economic po licy in major advanced 
economies are still at high levels. Therefore, it is like ly that the recent 
improvement in the risk sentiment may reverse course in t he forthcoming period. 
Should such a risk materialize, the Central Bank will t ake the necessary measures 
via the flexible policy framework it has developed.   
14. Overall, ongoing uncertainties regarding the glo bal economy necessitate the 
monetary policy to remain flexible in both directions.  Therefore, the impact of the 
measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and infl ation expectations will 
be monitored closely and the funding amount will be a djusted in either direction, 
as needed. 
15. Accelerating capital inflows and weak global economic outlook may aggravate 
macro financial risks, should they persist for a while. The  recent policies pursued 
by the Central Bank aim to prevent the build-up of r isks arising from long lasting 
capital inflows. In this respect, recent policies aim at con taining rapid credit growth and appreciation pressures on domestic currency. Macroprude ntial measures will 
continue to be taken, should the recent global trends  persist and credit growth 
expectations exceed 15 percent for a long period. 
16. On the other hand, aggregate demand and commodi ty prices may increase faster 
than expected and monetary policy may normalize in ad vanced economies, 
should the measures taken towards the solution of problem s regarding the global 
economy be completed sooner and more decisively than en visaged. 
Materialization of such a risk would increase pressures on inflation, and thus 
require a tightening using all policy instruments. 
17. Unprocessed food prices continue to pose risks regarding  inflation outlook. 
Developments in unprocessed food prices were the main fact ors explaining the 
lower-than-expected inflation in 2012. The possibility  of this trend reversing in 
2013 poses an upside risk on inflation. The Committee w ill not respond to volatility 
in unprocessed food prices, yet will deliver the necessar y tightening should this 
lead to deterioration in pricing behavior. 
18. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments an d tax adjustments closely, 
with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook.  Inflation forecasts take the 
framework outlined in the Medium Term Program as give n. In this respect, it is 
assumed that fiscal discipline will be sustained and there will be no unanticipated 
hikes in administered prices. A revision in the monetary policy stance may be 
considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantl y from this framework and 
consequently have an adverse effect on the medium-term inflation outlook. 
19. Prudent fiscal and financial sector policies are crucial  for preserving the resilience 
of our economy against existing global imbalances. Stre ngthening the structural 
reform agenda that would ensure the sustainability of  the fiscal discipline and 
reduce the savings deficit would support macroeconomic sta bility in the medium-
term. This will also provide more flexibility for mone tary policy and improve social 
welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term governm ent securities persistently 
at low levels. In this respect, steps towards implementati on of the structural 
reforms envisaged by the Medium Term Program remain t o be of utmost 
importance. 
  