No: 2013 – 62
Release Date: 17 December 2013

DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
Meeting Date: December 17, 2013
Participating Committee Members
Erdem Başçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati
Şahin, Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu.

The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to keep the short
term interest rates constant at the following levels:
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Lending rate at 7.75 percent, the interest rate on
borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via repo transactions at 6.75
percent, and borrowing rate at 3.5 percent,
b) One-week repo rate at 4.5 percent,
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.):
Borrowing rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 10.25 percent.
Data released since the last meeting suggest that final domestic demand and
exports continue to grow at a moderate pace. The present policy framework is
contributing to the improvement in the current account balance. The cautious monetary
policy stance, the announced macroprudential measures, and weak capital flows will
bring down the loan growth rates to more reasonable levels. Accordingly, the moderate
decline in the current account deficit excluding gold trade is expected to continue.
Inflation is expected to fall further in the forthcoming period. However, core
inflation indicators are likely to hover above the target for some time. The Committee
assessed that the current stance of the monetary policy is appropriate to contain
inflationary risks. Accordingly, it is indicated that interbank money market rates will
materialize close to 7.75 percent and the weighted average cost of funding will
materialize at 6.75 percent or above in the forthcoming period. The Committee stated
that the cautious monetary policy stance should be maintained until the inflation outlook
is in line with the medium term targets.
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the
Committee to revise its stance.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within
five working days.

