 
No: 2013 – 47  
Release Date: 17 September 2013 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: September 17, 2013 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati 
Şahin, Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu.  
 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to keep the short 
term interest rates constant at the following level s: 
a) One-week repo rate (the policy rate) at 4.5 perc ent, 
b) Overnight Interest Rates: Borrowing rate at 3.5 percent, lending rate at 7.75 
percent, and the interest rate on borrowing facilit ies provided for primary dealers 
via repo transactions at 6.75 percent. 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): 
Borrowing rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 10.25 percent. 
 
Recent data suggest that final domestic demand and exports continue to grow at 
a moderate pace. The current policy framework is im proving the current account 
balance. The weakness in capital flows, cautious mo netary policy stance and the 
macroprudential measures undertaken will gradually bring down the loan growth rates 
to more reasonable levels. Accordingly, gradual dec line in the current account deficit 
excluding gold trade is expected to continue.  
Inflation is expected to fall further in the forthc oming period. However, core 
inflation indicators are likely to hover above the inflation target for some time due to the 
exchange rate volatility observed during the recent  months. The impact of these 
developments on the pricing behavior is closely mon itored. The Committee will maintain 
the cautious monetary policy stance and implement a dditional monetary tightening at 
the appropriate frequency until the medium term inf lation outlook is in line with the 
medium term targets. 
Developments regarding price stability and financia l stability will be closely 
monitored and necessary adjustments will continue t o be made in the composition of 
Turkish lira liquidity provided by the Central Bank . Meanwhile, in order to contain the 
repercussions of uncertainties in global monetary p olicies on the domestic economy, 
increasing the predictability of the Turkish lira l iquidity policy is deemed important. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the 
Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within 
five working days. 