No: 2013 –66 
Release Date: 24 December 2013  
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date : December  17, 2013  
         Inflation Developments  
1. In November, consumer prices remained constant, while annual inflation 
declined to 7.32 percent. Unprocessed food prices and clothing prices that 
increased at a lower rate than seasonal averages were influential in this 
development. In this period, core inflation indicators followed a downward 
course.  
2. Annual food group inflation receded to 9. 77 percent. In November, 
unprocessed food group inflation decreased due to fresh fruit and vegetable 
prices and became 12.93 percent. Processed food prices increased by 0.49 
percent while the group’s annual inflation declined to 7.35 percent. Leading 
indicators for December suggest that the decline in annual food group inflation 
will continue.  
3. In November, energy prices increased by 0.25 percent, while annual energy 
inflation rose to 2.68 percent. Energy inflation continues to follow a favorable 
course, bu t will increase in December particularly due to sharp increases in 
LPG and bottled gas prices.  
4. In November, services prices increased by 0.35 percent and the group’s 
annual inflation rose to 7.96 percent. Among subcategories, annual inflation 
increased in rent and other services. Meanwhile, although services inflation 
remains elevated, seasonally adjusted data indicate a slowdown in the 
underlying trend. Annual core goods inflation, which has been following a 
volatile trend for the last two months due to cl othing prices, fell to 6.47 percent 
in November. Similarly, seasonally adjusted data suggest that the group’s 
underlying trend decreased. Accordingly, the underlying trend of core inflation 
indicators declined in November.  
5. In sum, the Committee expects tha t inflation will continue to fall in the 
upcoming period but core inflation indicators will remain above the target for a 
while.  
 Factors Affecting Inflation  
6. Recent data releases suggest that final domestic demand and exports 
continue to grow moderately. According to  third-quarter  national income data 
announced by TurkStat, economic activity increased in line with expectations. 
Investigating the contributions made by demand components to quarterly 
growth, it is seen that the highest contribution comes from  private demand. 
Considering the seasonally adjusted data with expenditure approach;  private 
consumption expenditures were higher compared to the second quarter, while 
private machinery -equipment investments increased mildly. Private 
construction investmen ts grew robustly in the third quarter as in the previous 
quarter. In the third quarter, both exports and imports decreased on a quarterly 
basis, while the balancing between external demand components displayed a 
more positive outlook compared to the second  quarter since  the decline in 
exports was more modest . Thus, the contribution of net exports to quarterly 
growth became positive for the first time in 2013. The quarterly contributions of 
public sector and stock change were negative.  
7. Data releases suggest that final domestic demand will continue to recover in 
the fourth quarter. The consumer confidence index, one of the indicators 
regarding the confidence channel that plays a major role in private 
consumption demand, increased moderately. Investments displa y a similar 
pattern to consumption demand. The expectation for fixed capital investment 
spending asked in the Business Tendency Survey continued to rise in 
November  –a trend that started in September – thanks to waning global and 
domestic uncertainties. Thus, private sector investments are expected to 
increase moderately in the last quarter of the year.   
8. Survey indicators for October -November suggest that economic activity 
continues to grow modestly. In fact, both the Business Tendency Survey’s 
past-three -month production question and the PMI index exceeded their third -
quarter averages. The BTS’ three -month -ahead expectations  for both 
domestic and export markets  increased significantly . 
9. Recent indicators suggest that exports continue to grow modestly. The non -
gold export volume index  was down in October  from the previous month, but 
its underlying trend  is thought to be  follow ing an upward track similar to that of  
production data . In fact, after prolonged sluggishness, the import demand from 
the EU, Turkey’s leading trading partner accounting for a substantial portion of 
Turkish exports, has displayed some recovery lately. Moreover, global PMI 
data show signs of global economic recovery. Thus, ex ternal demand 
conditions are expected to support exports in the upcoming period.  10. Data on f oreign trade and current account balance are in line with 
expectations. In 12 -month cumulative terms, non -gold exports remain on a 
modest uptrend, while non -gold impo rts post a relatively limited  growth. 
Accordingly, it is anticipated that  excluding the gold trade, the modest  
improvement in current account deficit will continue . 
11. According to seasonally adjusted data, total unemployment rate rose in 
September 2013 from the previous period, while  non-farm unemployment  rate 
declined.  However, both the labor participation rate and non-farm employment  
was down in September from the previous period.  Across subcategories  of 
non-farm employment, employment remains weak in the i ndustrial sector, but 
is slightly increasing in construction and services sectors . Leading indicators 
suggest that the weakening course of employment may continue in the 
October period. Yet, global economic uncertainties may remain a constraint to 
employme nt growth for the upcoming period . 
Monetary Policy and Risks  
12. The Committee assessed that final domestic demand and exports continue to 
grow at a moderate pace and that aggregate demand conditions do not exert 
an evident downside or upside pressure on inflation. The present policy 
framework is contributing to the improvement in the current account balance. 
The Committee stated that the cautious monetary policy stance, the 
announced  macroprudential meas ures,  and weak capital flows will bring down 
the loan  growth rates to more reasonable levels.  Accordingly, the moderate 
decline in the current account deficit excluding gold trade is expected to 
continue.  
13. Inflation is expected to fall further in the forthc oming period. Meanwhile, core 
inflation indicators are likely to hover above the inflation target for some time. 
The Committee stated that the cautious monetary stance should be 
maintained until the inflation outlook is in lin e with the  medium -term targets . 
The current policy stance is regarded to be  appropriate to contain inflationary 
risks. However, it was also stated caution should be exercised against 
developments that may worsen the inflation outlook.  
14. The Committee underlined the importance of a policy stance where  the short -
term market rates follow a more predictable and stable course in order to 
contain the effects of the uncertainty that stems from global monetary policies  
on the domestic economy . Accordingly, to increase the predictability of short -
term rates, the Committee stated that interbank market rates would be 
ensured to materialize around 7.75 percent, and the weighted average funding cost of funding  would be at or above 6.75 percent. It was also decided that the 
composition of the liquidity injected to the market would be adjusted 
accordingly.  
15. The Committee made assessments on the reserve options mechanism 
(ROM). It was stated  that the ROM functioned in accordanc e with its aim and 
steps might be taken to  strengthen its feature as an automatic stabiliz er in the 
upcoming period. Accordingly, it was expressed that reserve option 
coefficients especially in the last tranches might be gradually increased. The 
Committee also declared that increases in reserve option coefficients and the 
FX selling auctions would increase the funding requirement of the financial 
system. Thus, the effectiveness  of the provided interest rate predictability will 
be reinforced . The Committee h as stated that with these developments,  the 
cautious  monetary policy stance will continue to contribute to domestic and 
foreign demand  rebalancing , to more plausible growth rates in especially 
consumer  credits and to the decline in inflation . 
16. The Committee  monitors fiscal policy developments and tax adjustments 
closely with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline 
monetary policy stance takes the fiscal framework outlined in the Medium 
Term Program as given. Accordingly, it is assumed that fiscal discipline will be 
sustained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices. A 
revision in the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal 
stance deviate significantly from this framework and consequently have a n 
adverse effect on the medium -term inflation outlook.  
17. Prudent fiscal and financial sector policies are crucial for preserving the 
resilience of our economy against existing global imbalances. Strengthening 
the structural reform agenda that will ensure the  sustainability of the fiscal 
discipline and reduce the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability 
in the medium -term. This will also provide more flexibility for monetary policy 
and improve social welfare by keeping interest rates of long -term g overnment 
securities persistently at low levels. In this respect, implementation of the 
structural reforms outlined by the Medium Term Program remains to be of 
utmost importance.  
 