 
 No: 2013 – 37  
Release Date: 30 July 2013 
 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
 
Meeting Date:  23 July 2013 
   
  Inflation Developments 
1. In June, consumer prices edged up by 0.76 percen t and annual inflation reached 
8.30 percent. This uptick was attributed to the ris e in unprocessed food prices 
besides the base effect in energy prices. Total con tribution of price increases in 
food and energy groups to annual inflation increase d by 1.7 percentage points in 
June. Meanwhile, core inflation indicators remained  on a mild track. 
2. On the food and non-alcoholic beverages front, a nnual inflation soared by 5.81 
percentage points to 12.88 percent. As for the unpr ocessed food group, driven 
both by the price hikes in fresh fruits and the bas e effect in vegetable prices, 
annual inflation registered a remarkable increase. On the other hand, annual 
processed food inflation receded to 8.11 percent. B read prices remained on an 
upward track in this group, while other processed f ood products maintained a mild 
course. Leading indicators pertaining to July point  that the downward correction in 
unprocessed food prices has not started yet. 
3. Energy inflation went up owing to the depreciati on in the Turkish lira. Due to the 
recent increases and the base effect, annual rate o f increase in energy prices is 
envisaged to push annual inflation up in July as it  did in June. Meanwhile, the 
base effect is estimated to pull inflation down con siderably as of August.  
4. Prices of services went up by 1.19 percent, and annual services inflation 
increased to 7.88 percent in June. Nearly 0.5 perce ntage points of the rise in 
annual inflation was attributed to the hikes in dri ving course fees. Excluding this 
one-time effect, seasonally adjusted data suggest t hat the underlying trend of 
services inflation remained almost unchanged on a m onthly basis. 
5. Annual inflation in core goods group receded in all subcategories, particularly 
clothing, and stood at 3.28 percent in June. It is observed that the depreciation in 
the Turkish lira has not been evidently reflected o n to prices yet; and thus the 
seasonally adjusted trend of core goods prices main tained its downtrend in June. 
Accordingly, seasonally adjusted trends of core inf lation indicators remained on a 
mild course. 6. In sum, notwithstanding the mild course of core inflation indicators, inflation is 
expected to fluctuate in the short term due to the volatility in food and energy 
inflation, base effects and the movements in the ex change rates. Accordingly, 
inflation is projected to rise in July before falli ng significantly in August.  
  
Factors Affecting Inflation 
7. Second-quarter data point that domestic demand f ollows a healthy recovery in 
line with expectations. Industrial production poste d an increase in April-May 
period compared to the first-quarter average. Indus trial production is envisaged to 
register a month-on-month increase in June as well.  Improved consumer 
confidence in April and May underpinned the rise in  domestic demand. Despite 
the slight decline in confidence indices in June, c onsumption demand is expected 
to pick up on a quarterly basis in the second quart er. In fact, sales of automobiles 
and credit growth maintained a robust trend of incr ease in this period. Although 
displaying a favorable outlook, indicators of inves tment demand point to a weaker 
growth compared to the consumption demand. 
8. Data regarding the second quarter foreign trade and the current account balance 
are in line with expectations. Import demand revive s upon the recovery in the 
domestic demand, while exports grow at a moderate p ace. Annual cumulative 
foreign trade and current account deficit figures i n the short term are expected to 
continue with an upward trend mainly due to gold im ports. On the other hand, the 
current policy framework, which puts special emphas is on macro-financial risks, 
limits the deterioration in the current account bal ance. Accordingly, current 
account deficit, excluding gold trade, has been on a stable course.  
9. Non-farm employment remained on a steadily incre asing track in April 2013. 
Nevertheless, seasonally adjusted unemployment rate  remained unchanged upon 
the rise in employment participation rate. While th e recent rise in non-farm 
employment was mainly driven by the industrial sect or besides the construction 
sector, service sector employment remained flat. Th e PMI data signal that 
industrial employment will continue to increase, al beit at a decelerating pace. Yet, 
uncertainty regarding the global economy remains as  risk factor that may restrain 
investment and employment growth in the forthcoming  period.  
Monetary Policy and Risks  
10. The meeting included an assessment of the impac t of the recent developments in 
capital flows, which have weakened since May due to  increasing uncertainty 
regarding the global monetary policies. The Committ ee observed that loan growth continues to hover above the reference rate despite  the slowdown in capital flows, 
indicating that tightening the monetary policy stan ce under these circumstances 
would support financial stability. 
11. The Committee also assessed the medium term pro jections prepared for the July 
Inflation Report. It was stated that several coinci ding developments have recently 
affected inflation expectations adversely. Surging unprocessed food prices, rising 
oil prices, and the increased exchange rate volatil ity may continue to have 
adverse impact on inflation in the short term. Over all, given the assumptions 
underlying the inflation forecasts and external con ditions, end-2013 inflation 
forecast was revised upwards mainly on account of t he developments in the 
exchange rate and oil prices. These developments ar e expected to have a limited 
effect on end-2014 inflation due to the weak outloo k of the global economy and 
the mild course of domestic demand. Yet, the Commit tee indicated that a 
measured monetary tightening is deemed necessary in  order to contain a 
deterioration in the pricing behavior. 
12. In order to support the price and financial sta bility, the Committee decided to raise 
the upper bound of the interest rate corridor. It w as underscored that cautious 
stance will be maintained until the inflation outlo ok is in line with the medium term 
targets. In this respect, additional monetary tight ening will be implemented when 
necessary. 
13. Currently, data regarding global economic activ ity do not reveal a stable pattern. 
Risk appetite and capital flows may remain volatile , should uncertainties regarding 
economic policies of advanced economies persist. Th is situation may pose risks 
regarding the outlook for inflation and financial s tability. Materialization of such a 
risk will prompt the Central Bank to use the intere st corridor and other policy 
instruments to contain the excessive volatility in the exchange rate. 
14. On the other hand, the possibility of further d elays in the global recovery and the 
continuation of quantitative easing policies for an  extended period by the central 
banks of advanced economies remain as downside risk s, in which case capital 
flows to emerging economies may re-accelerate. Mate rialization of such a 
scenario would prompt the Central Bank to engage in  a strategy in which short-
term money market rates are lowered by easing liqui dity conditions, while the 
adverse impact of rapid capital inflows on financia l stability is alleviated through 
reserve requirement policy and reserve options mech anism. 
15. Due to ongoing uncertainties regarding the glob al economy and the volatility in 
capital flows, the Committee decided to increase th e flexibility of the liquidity 
management. To this end, developments regarding pri ce stability and financial stability will be closely monitored and necessary a djustments will be made in the 
composition of Turkish lira liquidity provided by t he Central Bank. 
16. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developmen ts and tax adjustments closely 
with regard to their effects on the inflation outlo ok. The baseline monetary policy 
stance takes the fiscal framework outlined in the M edium Term Program as given. 
In this respect, it is assumed that fiscal discipli ne will be sustained and there will 
be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices. A  revision in the monetary policy 
stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this 
framework and consequently have an adverse effect o n the medium-term inflation 
outlook. 
17. Prudent fiscal and financial sector policies ar e crucial for preserving the resilience 
of our economy against existing global imbalances. Strengthening the structural 
reform agenda that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and 
reduce the savings deficit would support macroecono mic stability in the medium-
term. This will also provide more flexibility for m onetary policy and improve social 
welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term gove rnment securities persistently 
at low levels. In this respect, implementation of t he structural reforms envisaged 
by the Medium Term Program remains to be of utmost importance. 
 