No: 2013 – 31 
Release Date: 25 June 2013  
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date:  18 June 2013  
   
  Inflation Developments   
1. In May, consumer prices edged up by 0. 15 percent and annual inflation went up 
to 6.51 percent. This rise was attributed to the base effect in energy prices. 
Meanwhile, core inflation indicators remained on a mild track.  
2. On the food and non -alcoholic beverages front, annual inflation went up to 7.07 
percent.  Processed food prices recorded an increase by 0.55 per cent, while 
annual inflation receded to 8.19 percent  in May . The group’s monthly inflation 
increased mainly due to the bread and cereals group ; whereas  the contribution of 
other processed food prices proved limited. On the other hand, m ainly driven by 
the prices of fresh vegetables, unprocessed food prices fell by 5.33 percent; 
however, the group’s annual inflation registered an increase owing to the base 
effect. Leading indicators pertaining to June point that the group’s annual inflation 
will soar.  
3. Energy  inflation maintained its favorable course owing to the decline in 
international oil prices, and the group’s prices fell by 0. 69 percent in May. 
Meanwhile, due to the elimination of  the favorable base effect in the last couple of 
months , annual energy infl ation went up by 1 .30 percentage points to 6.24 
percent. The base effect led by energy prices is estimated to push inflation up in 
June, and pull it down considerably as of August .  
4. Prices of services went  up by 0. 76 percent, and annual services inflation 
increased to 7.45 percent  in May . This rise in annual inflation was mainly 
attributed to rents and communication services. Seasonally adjusted  data suggest 
that inflation will trend upwards across the services group, particularly in rents. 
Meanwhile, the d iffusion index remained almost unchanged on a monthly basis.  
5. Annual inflation in core goods group did not record a noticeable change with  3.66 
percent in May . Following a consecutive decline for three months, the clothing 
group recorded a limited increase in May; while core goods inflation excluding 
clothing and durable goods continued with a stable trend of deceleration. 
Seasonally adjusted figures settled on a downward track in May. Accordingly, 
despite the uptrend in services inflation, seasonally adjust ed trends of core 
inflation indicat ors registered a decline.  6. In sum , the Monetary Policy Committee ( the Committee ) reiterated its projection 
that base eff ects would push the ener gy inflation up in June , and underlined that 
the course of unprocessed food pr ices would lead to a surge in annual inflation in 
June.  
Factors Affecting Inflation  
7. Recently -released d ata point that both domestic  and foreign  demand 
developments unfold as envisaged.  National accounts data relating to the first 
quarter of 2013 released b y the Tu rkStat sugge st that economic activity increased 
in line with expectations. Triggered by public investments and private 
consumption, final domestic demand proved the largest contributor of growth in 
this period. On the other hand, exports remai ned f lat in line with the weak  global 
demand; while net exports contributed negatively to  growth d ue to the increased 
import demand. Thus, the balancing trend  among demand components was 
subject to a slight deterioration in the first quarter.  
8. Data pertaining to  the second quarter point to a healthy recovery in final dom estic 
demand. Industrial production posted an increase in April compared to the first -
quarter average. Production  and imports of consumption goods , sales of 
automobiles, credit data and confidence  indices also indicate that dom estic 
demand will continue to improve . Indicators of investment  display a favorable 
outlook; however, private investments are projected to have a limited contribution 
to growth in th e second quarter.  
9. Data regarding foreign tr ade and the current account balance are evolving in line 
with expectations. Exports slow down due to weak global demand . As for imports, 
an increase was recorded upon the revival in domestic demand  besides the rise 
in demand for gold imports . This is expec ted to create a  slight increase in the 
current account deficit. However, the Committee has kept its view  that the current 
policy framework and the decline in commodity prices would contain the widening 
in the current account deficit.  
10. Seasonally adjusted d ata suggest that non -farm employment posted a  plausible 
increase in March 2013; yet remained incapable of covering the increase in labor 
force participation , which led to a rise in unemployment rates. The increase in 
non-farm employment was mainly driven b y the services sector besides the 
industrial sector, which settled on a trend of recovery in the last quarter of 2012. 
Meanwhile, employment in the construction sector remained flat. Survey 
indicators suggest that industrial employment has been  on an upwar d track  within 
the second quarter. The Committee expects that total employment will register 
mild increases in the period ahead. Nevertheless, uncertainties regarding the global economy remain critical as they may restrain employment growth in the 
forthcom ing period.  
 
Monetary Policy and Risks  
11. Amid the increased uncertainty regarding global monetary policies, c apital inflows 
have recently slowed down . Uncertainty about  the exit strategy from quantitative 
easing p olicies  implemented by the central banks of leading advanced economies 
as an integral part of accommodative monetary policies resulted in  capital 
outflows from emerging economies. Besides uncertain  monetary policies, the 
ongoing deleveraging process in advanced economies and persisting 
impediments  in the monetary transmission  mech anism leads volatility to remain 
high.   
12. The Committee assessed that the reserve options m echanism (ROM) functions 
as an automatic stabilizer against volatile  capital inflows.  Banks  increased the 
amount of foreign exchange res erves through the ROM  in times of strong capital 
inflows , and they used these reserves held at the Central Bank in times of capital 
outflows. Thus, the ROM contributed to  contain  the volatility in exchange rates.  
13. The Committee stated that short term additi onal monetary tightening and foreign 
exchange selling auctions may be implemented when deemed necessary; and did 
not opt for any change in monetary policy instruments. Meanwhile, the Committee 
declared that credit growth rates hover above the reference rat e both in consumer 
and business loans.  
14. The Committee expressed that the effects of properly recovering domestic 
demand, c redit growth above the reference rate and the exchange rate 
movements driven by global uncertainties on the pricing behavior would be  
closely monitored . Ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy and the 
volatility in capital flows necessitate the monetary policy to remain flexible in both 
directions . In this respect, t he Committee stated that necessary adjustments 
would be made i n the composition of Turkish lira  liquidity provided by the Central 
Bank.  The leading instrument in the adjustment of liquidity composition  is the 
foreign exchange selling auctions that enable shifting from net foreign assets to 
net domestic assets and fro m permanent liquidity to short -term funding. The 
Committee assessed  that foreign exchange selling auctions would contain 
excessive depreciation pressure on the exchange rates under the market 
conditions; and also ease the rapid credit growth by shifting th e TL liquidity to 
shorter maturities.  15. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments and tax adjustments closely, 
with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. In the setting of monetary 
policy, the framework outlined in the Medium Term Program  is taken as given. In 
this respect, it is assumed that fiscal discipline will be sustained and there will be 
no unanticipated hikes in administered prices. A revision in the monetary policy 
stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate signif icantly from this 
framework and consequently have an adverse effect on the medium -term inflation 
outlook.  
16. Prudent fiscal and financial sector policies are crucial for preserving the resilience 
of our economy against existing global imbalances. Strengtheni ng the structural 
reform agenda that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and 
reduce the savings deficit would support macroeconomic stability in the medium -
term. This will also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and improve s ocial 
welfare by keeping interest rates of long -term government securities persistently 
at low levels. In this respect, implementation of the structural reforms envisaged 
by the Medium Term Program remains to be of utmost importance.  
 
 