No: 2013 – 51 
Release Date: 26  September 2013  
  
PRESS RELEASE ON FOURTH MEETING OF THE FINANCIAL STABILITY 
BOARD REGIONAL CONSULTATIVE GROUP FOR MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH 
AFRICA  
  
Today, the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (CBRT) hosted the fourth 
meeting of the FSB Regional Consultative Group for the Middle East and North Africa 
(RCG -MENA) in İstanbul under the co -chairmanship of Erdem Başçı, Governor, 
CBRT and Riad Salame, Governor, Central Bank of Lebanon.  
Members discussed the FSB’s ongoing policy development work on financial 
regulatory reforms, vulnerabilities and regional financial stability issues, including the 
potential implications for the region of the evolving glo bal economic and financial -
market developments. They also discussed the elements of the D -SIB framework as 
well as the G -SIFI framework aimed at ending the problem of too -big-to-fail and 
shared implementation cha llenges in home and host countri es in adopti ng them. The 
current practices in the oversight of the over -the-counter derivatives markets in the 
region and challenges in improving them as well as the national approaches to 
banking -sector compensation, in the context of the FSB compensation principles and 
standards, were also discussed. Members also shared the institutional reforms 
needed and implemented as well as their experiences in strengthening and 
promoting such reforms in the insurance markets in the MENA region.  
The current membership of the RC G-MENA includes financial and regulatory 
authorities from Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Morocco, Oman, 
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates. The list of 
members of the RCG -MENA is accessible  at: 
 http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/about/rcgmena.pdf . 
 
Notes to editors  
The FSB Charter stipulates that the FSB “should consult widely amongst its 
Members and with other stakeholders including private sector and non -member 
authorities. This process shall include engaging with the FSB Regional Consultative 
Groups and include an  outreach to countries not included in the Regional 
Consultative Groups”.1 
 At the Toronto Summit in June 2010, the G20 Leaders endorsed such a 
process by calling on the FSB “to expand upon and formalize its outreach activities 
beyond the membership of the  G-20 to reflect the global nature of our financial 
                                                           
1 http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_120809.pdf  system”.2 Responding to the call, in  2011, six regional consultative groups3 of the 
FSB were established, to bring together financial authorities from FSB member and 
non-member countries to exchange views  on vulnerabilities affecting financial 
systems and on initiatives to promote financial stability.  
The FSB has been established to coordinate at the international level the work 
of national financial authorities and international standard setting bodies a nd to 
develop and promote the implementation of effective regulatory, supervisory and 
other financial sector policies in the interest of financial stability. It brings together 
national authorities responsible for financial stability in 24 countries and ju risdictions, 
international financial institutions, sector -specific international groupings of regulators 
and supervisors, and committees of central bank experts. Through the six regional 
groups, the FSB will be able to develop global financial policy initi atives through a 
more inclusive process.  The FSB is chaired by Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of 
England. Its Secretariat is located in Basel, Switzerland, and hosted by the Bank for 
International Settlements.  
For further information on the FSB, visit t he FSB website, 
www.financialstabilityboard.org.  
                                                           
2 http://www.g20.utoronto.ca/2010/g20_declaration_en.pdf  
3 The FSB regional consultative groups were established for the following regions: Americas, Asia, 
Commonwealth of Independent States, Europe, Middle East and North Africa, and Sub -Saharan Africa.  