 
No: 2013 – 23       Release Date: 2 3 May 2013  
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
 
Meeting Date: 16 May 2013  
 
  Inflation Developments  
1. In April , consumer prices increased  by 0.42 percent and annual inflation  receded 
to 6.13 percent. This fall was attributed to the base effect in energy prices besides 
the developments in unprocessed food prices. Total c ontribution of the food and 
energy groups to the annual inflation posted a monthly decline by around 1 
percen tage point in April. Meanwhile, core inflation indicators remained on a mild 
track.  
2. On the food and non -alcoholic beverages front, annual inflation went down to 6.83 
percent. Mainly driven by the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables, unprocessed 
food pri ces fell by 2.79 percent in April. In the meantime, price hikes in meat 
restrained the fall in the group’s prices. Annual processed food prices did not post 
a noticeable month -on-month change  in April, while the group’s annual inflation 
decreased to 8.26 percent. Prices of bread and cereals besides processed meat 
continued to rise, in contrast to the mild course of  other processed food prices .  
3. Energy inflation maintained its favorable course owing to the decline in 
international oil prices, and the group’s prices fell by 0.98 percent in April. Being 
also driven by  the high base  in the same period of the last year , annual energy 
inflation went down by 4.28 percentage points to 4.94 percent. The  base effect 
led by energy prices will remain as the determinant  on the course of annual 
inflation in the period ahead. The said effect is estimated to push inflation up in 
the May-July period, and pull it down later on.  
4. Prices of services edged  up by 0. 54 percent in April, while annual services 
inflation remained flat with  7.26 percent  on a monthly basis . Annual inflation in  
transport and re staurant -hotel services decreased in contrast to the increase in 
other subcategories.  The uptrend in rent inflation has accelerated recently. 
Meanwhile, both the seasonally adjusted rate of increase of the prices of services 
and the diffusion index registered an increase in April .  
5. Annual inflation in core goods group went down to 3.61 percent in  March. All the 
subcategories of core goods saw a decline in a nnual inflation , and the  seasonally 
adjusted figures settled on a downward track .  Factors Affecting Inflation  
6. Data regarding the first -quarter of 2013 point that final domestic demand follows a 
healthy recovery.  Notwithstanding t he weak course in March, the industrial 
production index recorded a  quarter-on-quarter increase. In the same period, 
production and imports of both consumption and investment goods registered 
increases. Among the data regarding t he second quarter, d omestic sales of 
automobiles besides the credit data of April also point  that the recovery of first 
quarter will continue . The consumer confidence index also displays a similar 
outlook. Against this background, the Monetary Policy Committee (the 
Committee) assessed that final domestic demand would have a sizeable 
contribution to growth in the first half of the year.  Nevertheless, uncertainties 
regarding the global economy may restrain inv estment growth in the forthcoming 
period.  
7. Data pertaining to foreign trade and the current account balance are evolving in 
line with expectations. Exports slow down due to weak global economic activity. 
As for imports, an increase was recorded upon the re vival in domestic demand, 
which will bring a rise in the current account deficit. However, t he Committee 
assessed that the current policy framework and the decline in commodity prices 
would contain the widening in the current account deficit.  
8. Seasonally adjusted data sugge st that unemployment rates went down on 
account of the rise  in employment in February 2013. The increase in n on-farm 
employment was mainly driven by the services sector besides the industrial 
sector, which settled on a trend of recovery in the last quarter of 2012. Meanwhile, 
employment in the construction sector remained flat. Survey indicators suggest 
that industrial employment  will decelerate  in the second quarter. The Committee 
expects that total e mployment will register mild increase s in the period  ahead .  
Risks and the Monetary Policy  
9. Capital inflows remain strong and credit growth hovers above the reference rate. 
The Committee indicated that, in order to balance the risks on financial stability, 
the proper policy would be to keep in terest rates low while increasing foreign 
currency reserves via macroprudential measures. Accordingly, it was deemed 
appropriate to implement a measured tightening via reserve requirements and 
reserve options coefficients, while delivering a cut in the sho rt term interest rates.  
10. The Committee has continued its strategy to increase the effectiveness of the 
Reserve Options Mechanism (ROM) gradually in response to the heightened 
volatility in capital inflows. The Committee indicated that, in order to enhance t he 
automatic stabilizer effect of the mechanism, the coefficients should be adjusted upwards and a new tranche should be added to the existing scheme. The 
Committee has underscored that m ore effective utilization of the ROM reduces 
the need for a wider interest rate corridor.  
11. Ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy and the volatility in capital 
flows necessitate the monetary policy to remain flexible in both directions. 
Therefore, the impact of the measures undertaken on credit, domestic deman d, 
and inflation expectations will be monitored closely and the funding amount will be 
adjusted in either direction, as needed.  
12. The Committee has indicated that the weak global demand and the commodity 
price outlook contain the upward pressures on inflatio n. In the meantime, the 
impact of increases in credit and domestic demand on the pricing behavior will be 
monitored closely.  
13. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments and tax adjustments closely, 
with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. In the setting of monetary 
policy, the framework outlined in the Medium Term Program is taken as given. In 
this respect, it is assumed that fiscal discipline will be sustained and there will be 
no unanticipated hikes in administered prices. A revi sion in the monetary policy 
stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this 
framework and consequently have an adverse effect on the medium -term inflation 
outlook.  
14. Prudent fiscal and financial sector policies are crucial for preserving the resilience 
of our economy against existing global imbalances. Strengthening the structural 
reform agenda that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and 
reduce the savings deficit would support macroeconomic stability i n the medium -
term. This will also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and improve social 
welfare by keeping interest rates of long -term government securities persistently 
at low levels. In this respect, implementation of the structural reforms env isaged 
by the Medium Term Program remains to be of utmost importance.  
 