No: 2014 - 27 
Release Date: 30 April  2014  
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date : 24 April 2014  
  
Inflation Developments  
1. In March, consumer prices rose by 1.13 percent month -on-month, and annual 
inflation increased by 0.5 points to 8.39 percent. The lagged effects of the 
depreciation in the Turkish lira continued to affect core inflation indicators 
adversely, particularly through the core goods channel. This, along with the 
unfavorable course of food prices, will cause inflation indicators to remain high 
for some time.  
2. Annual food group inflation increased slightly to 10.12 percent. In the first 
quarter, fruit and vegetable prices were moderate, while food prices excluding 
this group were substantially unfavorable. Especially p rocessed food prices 
posted a sharp rise  in the  first three months of the year due to the depreciation 
of the Turkish lira and adverse weather conditions. Owing to these effects, the 
annual food price inflation is expected to rise further in April.  
3. Prices of services edged up by 0.65 percent month -on-month, and the group’s 
annual inflation increased by 0.26 points to 8.60 percent. This was largely 
attributed to the dramatic increase in catering prices (restaurants -hotels) caused 
by the developments i n food prices excluding fruit and vegetables. Additionally, 
annual inflation in other services items excluding rents and transportation also 
increased. The s easonally adjusted data point to a n ongoing  rise in the 
underlying trend of services inflation in t his period as well.  
4. Annual core goods inflation increased by  a marked  1.64 points to 10.04  percent 
in March . The annual inflation in durable consumer goods rising on the back of 
the Turkish lira depreciation reached 15 percent. Meanwhile, clothing prices 
recorded the highest March increase in the history of the index . This was mainly 
driven by cost and external demand related developments as well as the early 
launch of the new season. March was marked by a strong exchange rate pass -
through across the core g oods group. Accordingly, t he seasonally -adjusted data 
pointed to a notable  rise in the underlying  trend of the core goods inflation. Thus, 
core inflation indicators registered a negative  outlook as well.   
  Factors Affecting Inflation  
5. According to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) data for the fourth quarter of 
2013, economic activity was largely consistent with the outlook presented in the 
January Inflation Report. In seasonally adjusted terms, GDP grew by 0.5 
percent quarter -on-quarter , allowing economic activity to be more moderate in 
the second half of the year after a robust acceleration in the first half. Final 
domestic demand increased at a more rapid pace after a weak second and third 
quarter. Among final domestic demand component s, private demand remained 
modest throughout 2013, while  public demand followed a volatile path, thus 
determining the direction of domestic demand . In the fourth quarter, e xports 
increased at a faster pace than imports on a quarterly basis, and demand 
comp onents moved in the direction  of rebalancing compared to  the first half of 
the year as expected . 
6. Data for the first quarter of 2014 suggest that economic activity grew moderately. 
On the production side, the industrial production index remained broadly 
unchanged month -on-month in February after registering a monthly 1.0 percent 
increase in January. Thus, production was 1.7 percent higher from the previous 
quarter’s average during January -February and continued to grow steadily in 
quarterly terms. In the upc oming period, production is expected to grow further 
on the back of export s and the modest domestic demand.  
7. Data on spending show that private demand weakened in the first quarter due 
to developments in the consumption of durable goods and the private 
machinery -equipment. On the other hand, data on the consumption of 
nondurable goods and construction investments remain favorable. Among 
subcategories of imports of consumption goods, during January -February, 
imports of automobiles plunged, while i mports of durable and semi -durable 
goods fell modestly and imports of nondurable goods continued to rise. In this 
period , the production of durable goods was down from the previous quarter, 
whereas the production of nondurable goods remained on the rise. A s an 
indicator for machinery -equipment investments, the production of investment 
goods excluding transport somewhat flattened while imports of the same group 
declined. Moreover, data regarding construction investments show that the 
increase in construction  investments continued.  
8. With the reduced uncertainty, the small yet  discernible  recovery in confidence 
indices and the appreciation of the Turkish lira , a re covery is expected in 
consumption demand . With the support of this recovery , domestic demand is 
expected to start growing steadily by the second quarter. Yet, second -quarter loan and import s data  and BTS indices suggest that this recovery will be a 
moderate one.  
9. Recent data show that exports continued to grow in the first quarter of 2014. 
The non -gold export volume index was up month -on-month in January and 
February and hovered above its fourth -quarter average during January -
February. With the support of  the globa l recovery signaled by recent survey 
indicators, the pickup in international trade and the Turkish lira depreciation, 
exports are expected to make a positive contribution to growth in the upcoming 
period. PMI and BTS export indicators hint at a similar pat tern.  
10. In sum, recent data releases indicate that final domestic demand will lose 
momentum in the first quarter , whereas exports will limit the impact of this 
slowdown on growth.  With recent decline  in uncertainties, private demand may 
start recovering as well by the second quarter of the year, which, however, might 
be curbed by tight financial conditions. Against this background, the Committee 
expects the rebalancing to continue  and the current account deficit to improve 
significantly  in 2014 . 
11. In seasonall y adjusted terms, total and non -farm unemployment rates continued 
to fall in January 2014. This drop in unemployment rates was mostly driven by 
the upsurge in non -farm employment. Employment basically increased across 
services and construction sectors. Ind ustrial employment, on the other hand, 
increased only slightly and remained relatively weak. After having plummet ed 
during the first months of 2014, confidence indices increased month -on-month 
in March. Furthermore, total employment expectations, a BTS indicator, 
continued to deliver positive returns despite a seasonally -adjust ed monthly 
decline in April.  
Monetary Policy and Risk s 
12. The Committee assessed the medium -term forecasts to be published in the 
April Inflation Report. It was noted that the main re ason behind the annual 
consumer inflation’s overshooting of January forecasts in the first quarter of 
2014 was exchange rate movements and the unfavorable course of food prices. 
Upon evaluating both the assumptions underlying inflation forecasts and 
extern al conditions, the end -2014 inflation forecast is revised upwards in view 
of exchange rates, import and oil prices, food prices and developments in 
underlying inflation  trend . 
13. The Committee stated that l oan growth rates continue to slow down in response 
to the tight monetary stance and the recent macro prudential measures. The slowdown in loan growth is mostly attributed to consumer loans and credit cards, 
while commercial loans expand at a rate similar t o past years. This positive 
development  in loan growth composition  is expected to  contribute to financial 
stability, the rebalancing  process and the decrease in inflation. As a matter of 
fact, data regarding the first quarter of 2014 indicate some deceleration in 
private final domestic demand. Meanwhile, net exports are expected to 
contribute positively to economic growth thanks to the recovery in external 
demand,  particularly from European countries, and real exchange rate 
developments. Given such a demand composition, the Committee  expects that 
aggregate demand conditions will contain inflationary pressures and the current 
account deficit will exhibit  a significa nt improvement in 2014.  
14. The Committee  closely monitors inflation expectations and the pricing behavior. 
The slowdown in consumer loans and the weak private demand are expected 
to restrict the effect of the cost -push shocks on inflation in the coming period . 
However, lagged effects of the exchange rate movements and the unfavorable 
course of food prices are likely to cause inflation to remain above the target for 
some time . Given the elevated level of inflation, the Committee stated that it is 
important to p revent  the negative effects on the prici ng behavior and on the 
inflation  trend . The strong and front -loaded monetary tightening delivered at the 
January interim meeting has contained the potential adverse impact of the 
upside risks on the medium term infla tion expectations. Yet, considering that 
the positive impact of the monetary tightening will be observed on inflation with 
some lag, inflation might continue to increase in the short term, partly reflecting 
the base effects. In the meantime, the Committee will closely monitor inflation 
expectations and the pricing behavior and maintain the tight monetary policy 
stance until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.  
15. In times when negative effects on the inflation outlook are strong and 
uncertainties are large, the C entral Bank may tighten the liquidity policy further 
to restrict these developments. During additional tightening, the yield curve can 
be inverted  if necessary . The Committee indicated that t he recent decline in 
uncertainties and the partial improvement in risk premium indicators have 
reduced the need for an additional tightening in liquidity policy. With the 
deceleration in private demand and the significant slowdown  in consumer loans, 
the cu rrent tight monetary  stance is believed to be enough to attain  an inflation 
outlook consistent with medium term targets. In case of further deterioration in 
the trend of inflation or a dramatic rise in uncertainties, the C entral Bank might 
implement additi onal tightening in liquidity policy.  
16. As the uncertainty about the Fed’s quantitative easing  program has recently 
faded to a great extent and thanks to the global economic recovery, the risk sentiment across global financial markets has become more upbeat. Yet, 
expectations about the timing and pace of a Fed rate hike are of importance  for 
pricing  in financial markets. However, because the transmission mechanism of 
the interest rate channel is better known than quantitative easing  and the 
monetary policy dependence on  high-frequency data has decreased in this  
process, the uncertainty effect of an interest rate hike on financial markets might 
be more limited  than that of the exit from the quantitative easing  program. Hence, 
capital may start flowing back to  emerging economies. Moreover, the ECB’s 
possible quantitative easing might  be another support ing factor for  capital flows. 
If this scenario materializes, the C entral Bank might take steps to accumulate  
foreign exchange reserves.  
17. On the other hand, should there be long -lasting increases in  uncertainties and 
risk premium; the economy may face an additional slowdown through the 
confidence and balance sheet channels. If such a risk materializes , the C entral 
Bank will pursue a stabilizing policy by using its po licy instruments to reduce the 
intermediation costs of the banks. In a scenario where it is necessary to tighten 
the liquidity policy, macro prudential tools might be used as a stabilizer to 
contain the repercussions on banking costs. Similarly, in a scena rio where the 
external funding conditions tighten for banking sector, macro prudential policies 
might be implemented  in a stabilizing way . The Committee pointed out the 
possibility of  paying interest to the portion of reserve requirements held in 
Turkish l iras in this  context.  
18. The Committee closely monitors developments on fiscal policy and tax 
adjustments with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline 
monetary stance is formulated under the assumption  that fiscal discipline will be 
maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes on administered prices in 
the forthcoming period. A revision of the monetary policy stance may be 
considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this frame work, 
and consequently, have an adverse effect on the medium -term inflation outlook.  
19. Strengthening structural reforms that will ensure the sustainability of the fiscal 
discipline and reduce the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability in 
the me dium term. Steps taken in this regard will also provide more room for 
maneuvering the monetary policy and improving social welfare by keeping 
interest rates of long -term government securities at low levels. In this respect, 
implementing the structural refo rms required by the MTP remains to be of 
utmost importance.  