 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: May 22, 2014 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu.  
 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to set the short term 
interest rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate has been kept at 12 percent, the 
interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via repo transactions 
has been kept at 11.5 percent, and borrowing rate h as been kept at 8 percent. 
b) One-week repo rate has been reduced from 10 perc ent to 9.5 percent. 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing 
rate has been kept at 0 percent, and lending rate h as been kept at 13.5 percent. 
 
With the recent decline in uncertainties and improv ement in the risk premium indicators, 
market interest rates have fallen across all maturi ties. In this regard, the Committee decided on 
a measured decrease in the one week funding rate. T he Committee stated that, with a flat yield 
curve even after this decision, the monetary policy  stance will continue to be tight. Inflation 
expectations, pricing behavior and other factors th at affect inflation will be closely monitored and 
the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained  until there is a significant improvement in the 
inflation outlook. 
Loan growth continues at reasonable levels in respo nse to the tight monetary policy 
stance and macroprudential measures. In line with t hese developments, recent data indicate to 
a modest course in private final domestic demand. M eanwhile, with the help of the recovery in 
foreign demand, the contribution of net exports to economic growth is expected to increase. The 
Committee expects that such a demand composition wi ll support disinflation and will lead to a 
significant improvement in the current account defi cit in 2014. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to 
revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five 
working days. No : 2014 – 31     Release Date: 22 May  2014     