No:2014-52

Release Date: 27 August 2014

DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
Meeting Date: August 27, 2014
Participating Committee Members
Erdem Başçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin,
Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu.

The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to set the short term
interest rates as follows:
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate has been reduced from 12 percent
to 11.25 percent, the interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via
repo transactions has been reduced from 11.5 to 10,75, and borrowing rate has been
kept at 7.5 percent.
b) One-week repo rate has been kept at 8.25 percent.
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing
rate has been kept at 0 percent, and lending rate has been reduced from 13.5 percent to
12.75 percent.
Loan growth continues at reasonable levels in response to the tight monetary policy
stance and macroprudential measures. In line with these developments, private final domestic
demand follows a modest course.
The adverse impact of exchange rate developments since mid-2013 on annual inflation
is gradually tapering off. However, elevated food prices continue to delay the improvement in
the inflation outlook. In this respect, the Committee also evaluated the possible impact of the
drought and the geopolitical risks on the inflation outlook.
In light of these assessments the Committee decided to maintain the current stance
within a more symmetric interest rate corridor. Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other
factors that affect inflation will be closely monitored and the tight monetary policy stance will be
maintained, by keeping a flat yield curve, until there is a significant improvement in the inflation
outlook.
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to
revise its stance.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five
working days.

