 
No: 2014 – 32  Release Date: 29 May  2014 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: 22 May 2014 
 
Inflation Developments 
1. In April, consumer prices rose by 1.34 percent m onth-on-month, and annual 
inflation increased by 1 percentage points to 9.38 percent. This uptick in 
annual inflation was particularly driven by food pr ices. Meanwhile, the lagged 
effects of the depreciation in the Turkish lira con tinued to affect core inflation 
indicators adversely through the core goods channel .  
 
2. Annual food group inflation climbed to 13.15 per cent amid soaring prices of 
fruits in April, contrary to their moderate course in the first quarter. The rise in 
the annual processed food inflation remained compar atively limited.  
 
3. Prices of services edged up by 0.55 percent mont h-on-month, and the group’s 
annual inflation remained flat at 8.61 percent. The  persisting rise in the prices 
of catering services (restaurants-hotels) due to th e developments in the food 
group excluding fruits and vegetables lost pace com pared to the first quarter. 
Annual inflation in rents, transport and communicat ion services exhibited a 
relatively mild course in this period, while other services (particularly health 
and education) posted rising figures. The seasonall y adjusted data point to 
persisting high levels in the underlying trend of s ervices inflation in this period 
without any further acceleration. 
 
4. Annual core goods inflation rose by 1.06 percent age points to 11.10 percent in 
April. With the effect of accumulated depreciation in the Turkish lira, the 
annual inflation in durable consumer goods reached 15.87 percent. In this 
group, price increases in automobiles and white goo ds decelerated in contrast 
to the upsurge in furniture prices. Meanwhile, clot hing prices rose above 
seasonal averages in April and the group’s annual i nflation reached 7.61 
percent. April developments indicate that the effec ts of the exchange rate 
waned in some groups, yet spread across the core go ods group. Accordingly, 
core goods became the main driver of the rise in th e underlying trend of the 
core inflation.  
 
   Factors Affecting Inflation 
5. Data for the first quarter of 2014 point to a mo derate increase in economic 
activity. On the production side, following the ris e in January, the industrial 
production index posted a slight fall in February a nd March. Thus, production 
maintained a steady trend of quarterly increase by exceeding the average of 
the previous quarter by 1.4 percent in the first qu arter. The upcoming period is 
expected to witness an ongoing rise in production w ith the support of exports 
and modest course in the domestic demand. 
6. Data on expenditure side show that private deman d weakened in the first 
quarter due to developments in the consumption of d urable goods and the 
investment of private machinery-equipment. On the o ther hand, data on the 
consumption of nondurable goods and construction in vestments remain 
favorable. Among subcategories of imports of consum ption goods, imports of 
automobiles plunged, while imports of durable and s emi-durable goods fell 
moderately and imports of non-durable goods continu ed to rise in the first 
quarter. In this period, the production of durable goods was down from the 
previous quarter, whereas the production of nondura ble goods remained on 
the rise. Among the indicators of machinery-equipme nt investments, the 
production and imports of investment goods excludin g transport declined. 
Moreover, the data regarding construction investmen ts show that the increase 
in construction investments continued.  
7. With the support of recovery in consumption dema nd thanks to reduced 
perceptions of uncertainty, improved confidence ind ices, and appreciation in 
Turkish lira, the domestic demand is expected to se ttle on a track of gradual 
increase starting from second quarter. Nevertheless , second-quarter CBRT 
Business Tendency Survey (BTS), PMI, loans and impo rts data suggest that 
this recovery will be moderate.  
8. Recent data show that exports continued to grow in the first quarter of 2014. 
The export volume index excluding gold rose again i n March and hovered 
above its average in the previous quarter. With the  support of the global 
recovery signaled by recent survey indicators, and the pickup in international 
trade, exports are envisaged to follow a favorable path in the upcoming period. 
PMI and BTS export indicators also support this out look.  
 
9. In seasonally adjusted terms, total and non-farm  unemployment rates declined 
in February 2014. This drop in unemployment rates w as driven by the upsurge 
in non-farm employment. Furthermore, seasonally adj usted data regarding 
total employment expectations, a BTS indicator, mai ntain its trend of favorable 
outlook.  
 10. In sum, recent data releases indicate that the private final domestic demand 
will follow a modest course, and with the help of t he recovery in foreign 
demand, net exports will contribute positively to g rowth. It is expected that the 
current outlook in demand components will curb infl ationist pressures and 
support the improvement in the current account defi cit. 
 
Monetary Policy and Risks  
11. Owing to the significant decline in uncertainti es about the Fed’s asset 
purchases recently coupled with the recovery in glo bal growth, the risk 
sentiment improved across global financial markets.  Along with these 
developments, emerging economies saw limited amount s of portfolio inflows 
after a long while. Risk indicators, which deterior ated in times of elevated 
country-specific risks in Turkey, recovered due to the waning domestic and 
external uncertainties. With the recent decline in uncertainties and 
improvement in the risk premium indicators, market interest rates declined 
across all maturities. In this regard, the Committe e decided on a measured 
decrease in the one-week funding rate. It is stated  that, with a flat yield curve 
even after this decision, the monetary policy stanc e will continue to be tight.  
12. The Committee closely monitors inflation expect ations and the pricing 
behavior. The slowdown in consumer loans and the we ak private demand are 
expected to restrict the effect of the cost-push sh ocks on inflation in the 
coming period. Moreover, thanks to the strong and f ront-loaded monetary 
tightening delivered in January and the recently-wa ned uncertainties, a 
considerable portion of the depreciation in the Tur kish lira during the first 
quarter is reversed. This development in the exchan ge rates is assessed to 
contribute favorably to the inflation outlook. Howe ver, lagged effects of the 
exchange rate movements and the unfavorable course of food prices are likely 
to cause inflation to remain above the target for s ome time. In the meantime, 
the Committee will closely monitor inflation expect ations, the pricing behavior 
and other factors that affect inflation and maintai n the tight monetary policy 
stance by keeping the yield curve flat until there is a significant improvement in 
the inflation outlook.  
13. The Committee stated that loan growth continues  at reasonable levels in 
response to the tight monetary policy stance and ma croprudential measures. 
Across subcategories, growth rates of consumer loan s and credit cards exhibit 
a notable slowdown, while growth of commercial loan s expand at a rate close 
to past years. The Committee assessed that this pos itive development in loan 
growth composition will contribute to financial sta bility, the rebalancing process 
and the decrease in inflation. In line with these d evelopments, recent data indicate a modest course in the private final domes tic demand. Meanwhile, net 
exports are expected to contribute positively to ec onomic growth thanks to the 
recovery in external demand, particularly from Euro pean countries, and real 
exchange rate developments. The Committee expects t hat such a demand 
composition will support disinflation and will lead  to a significant improvement 
in the current account deficit in 2014.  
14. Although having faded to a great extent, the un certainty about global monetary 
policies is yet to disappear. Expectations about th e timing and pace of the 
Fed’s rate hike are important to the pricing in fin ancial markets. However, the 
transmission mechanism of the interest rate channel  is better known than the 
quantitative easing and the monetary policy depende nce on high-frequency 
data has decreased. As a result, it is assessed tha t the uncertainty effect of an 
interest rate hike on financial markets might be mo re limited than that of the 
exit from the quantitative easing program. Moreover , the ECB’s possible 
quantitative easing might be another supporting fac tor for capital flows. Hence, 
capital may start flowing back to emerging economie s. If this scenario 
materializes, the Central Bank might take steps to accumulate foreign 
exchange reserves. 
15. The Committee closely monitors developments on fiscal policy and tax 
adjustments with regard to their effects on the inf lation outlook. The baseline 
monetary stance is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will 
be maintained and there will be no unanticipated hi kes on administered prices 
in the forthcoming period. A revision of the moneta ry policy stance may be 
considered, should the fiscal stance deviate signif icantly from this framework, 
and consequently, have an adverse effect on the med ium-term inflation 
outlook. 
16. Strengthening structural reforms that will ensu re the sustainability of the fiscal 
discipline and reduce the savings deficit will supp ort macroeconomic stability 
in the medium term. Steps taken in this regard will  also provide more room for 
maneuvering the monetary policy and improving socia l welfare by keeping 
interest rates of long-term government securities a t low levels. In this respect, 
implementing the structural reforms required by the  MTP remains to be of 
utmost importance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 