No: 2014-06            Release Date: 28 January 201 4 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: January 28, 2014 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu.  
 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to adjust the short term 
interest rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate is increased from 7.75 percent to 
12 percent, borrowing rate from 3.5 percent to 8 pe rcent, and the interest rate on 
borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers v ia repo transactions from 6.75 to 11.5 
percent. 
b) One-week repo rate is increased from 4.5 percent  to 10 percent. 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing 
rate is kept at 0 percent, lending rate is increase d from 10.25 percent to 15 percent. 
 
Recent domestic and external developments are havin g an adverse impact on risk 
perceptions, leading to a significant depreciation in the Turkish lira and a pronounced increase 
in the risk premium. The Central Bank will implemen t necessary measures at its disposal to 
contain the negative impact of these developments o n inflation and macroeconomic stability. In 
this respect, the Committee decided to implement a strong monetary tightening and to simplify 
the operational framework. Accordingly, (i) one-wee k repo rate is increased from 4.5 percent to 
10 percent; (ii) the Central Bank liquidity will be  provided primarily from one-week repo rate 
instead of the marginal funding rate in the forthco ming period. 
Tight monetary policy stance will be sustained unti l there is a significant improvement in 
the inflation outlook. Under this policy stance, in flation is expected to reach the 5 percent target 
by mid-2015.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to 
revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five 
working days. 