   
 
No: 2014-78  
PRESS RELEASE  
31 December 2014 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 24 December 2014       
Inflation Developments  
1.  In November, consumer prices rose by 0.18 percent a nd annual inflation edged up by 
0.19 points to 9.15 percent. This rise in annual in flation was mainly driven by food 
prices. Meanwhile, the energy inflation declined co nsiderably in line with the 
international oil prices. The underlying core goods  inflation increased slightly, while 
the services inflation lost pace due to the favorab le effects of falling energy prices. 
2.  Annual food inflation rose by 1.81 percentage point s to 14.37 percent. This rise was 
led particularly by fresh fruits and vegetables, th e annual inflation of which soared 
due to the base effect. The seasonally-adjusted dat a pointed to a partial correction in 
unprocessed food prices in the last three months. H owever, the unfavorable outlook 
that spilled over into processed food prices contin ued in November and inflation 
climbed to 13.61 percent in this group. Indicators for December signal a possible 
decline in the annual food inflation due to the unp rocessed food group. 
3.  Energy prices decreased by 1.44 percent in November , and the group’s annual 
inflation dropped to 2.68 percent. The first-round effects of the decline in oil prices 
on energy prices, and consumer inflation in turn, a ppeared in fuel and bottled gas 
prices. Brent crude oil prices decreased approximat ely by USD 30 in the July-
November period, and the direct effect of this decl ine through fuel and bottled gas 
prices on the consumer inflation was around -0.5 po ints in this period. Indicators for 
December suggest that in line with the decline in o il prices, the downward course in 
these two items continued, being more pronounced in  fuel prices. Accordingly, the 
annual energy inflation is foreseen to decrease not ably in December. 
4.  Annual core goods inflation increased approximately  by 0.4 points to 9.36 percent in 
November. Annual inflation increased in durables an d clothing, but remained on a 
downtrend in core goods excluding these items. Pric es of services did not record a 
noticeable month-on-month change and the group’s an nual inflation receded by 0.36 
points to 8.81 percent. The decline in oil prices a ffected particularly fuel-related 
 services groups positively, such as transport and p ackage tours. This effect is 
projected to continue in the upcoming period. 
5.  The seasonally-adjusted data point to a sustained i mprovement in the underlying 
trend of core inflation indicators. The fall in the  underlying trend of services inflation 
triggered by the items closely related to fuel pric es contributed to this development.  
Factors Affecting Inflation 
6.  Data released by TurkStat show that the GDP grew by  a mere 1.7 percent year-on-
year during the third quarter of 2014. On the produ ction front, the marked yearly 
decline in the agricultural value-added has been a major factor in the slow GDP 
growth. On the expenditure front, the final domesti c demand made a positive 
contribution to annual growth after contributing ne gatively a quarter ago, while net 
exports have been the main driver of annual growth.  Among components of 
domestic demand, private demand has made a smaller contribution than public 
demand.  
7.  Data announced for the final quarter of 2014 point to an improved outlook for 
economic activity compared to the previous quarter.  Even though industrial 
production decreased by 1.8 percent month-on-month in October, this realization 
stems largely from the correction of previous month s and the effects of shifting 
holidays on seasonal adjustments. October-November data from the PMI and the 
Business Tendency Survey are actually signaling an increase in the fourth-quarter 
economic activity. Survey indicators show that expe ctations for the domestic market 
are stronger than those for exports. In this regard , with the support of the recovery 
in domestic demand, moderate growth in production i s expected in the fourth 
quarter.  
8.  Leading data on the expenditure side point to a mod erate fourth-quarter recovery in 
private domestic demand. During October-November, a utomobile sales continued to 
grow robustly quarter-on-quarter. Loans, on the oth er hand, remain on a modest 
growth path. Furthermore, the recovery in expectati ons for investment during the 
past three months is notable. Yet, consumer confide nce has been weak throughout 
the last three months, suggesting that the downside  risks on consumption still exist.  
9.  External demand indicators point to no improvement in the rebalancing process 
based on goods excluding gold, which ground to a ha lt in the third quarter. Europe’s 
slowing economy and geopolitical tensions have caus ed exports to lose some pace. 
However, the favorable developments in the terms of  trade and the moderate course 
of consumer loans are expected to contribute to the  improvement in the current 
account balance.  
10.  In seasonally adjusted terms, total and nonfarm une mployment rates were higher in 
September than in the previous period. The rise in unemployment rates was caused 
by the increase in the ratio of nonfarm labor force  to working-age population. All 
nonfarm subsectors, services in particular, added t o employment growth. Total  employment expectations, a Business Tendency Survey  indicator, have moved 
further into positive territory during the final qu arter. In this regard, nonfarm 
employment might see a modest increase in the final  quarter.   
11.  To sum up, fourth-quarter data point to a moderate recovery in economic activity. In 
this period, external demand remains weak, while th e contribution of domestic 
demand to growth is at moderate levels. Yet, the pr evailing signs of global economic 
slowdown, the uncertainty surrounding global moneta ry policies and geopolitical 
tensions put downside pressure on growth. Against t his background, demand 
conditions are expected to support disinflation pro cess. 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
12.  Loan growth continues at reasonable levels in respo nse to the tight monetary policy 
stance and the macroprudential measures. The compos ition of loans also continues 
to move in the desired direction. While the annual growth rate of consumer loans 
hovers around low levels, commercial loans remain r elatively more robust. This loan 
outlook not only limits medium-term inflationary pr essures but also contributes to 
the improvement in the current account balance. Add itional tightening measures will 
be taken, should credit growth accelerate in a way that poses upside risks to inflation 
and aggravates financial risks by distorting the re balancing process.  
13.  Languishing external demand due to halting growth i n European countries, the 
largest export market of Turkey, and geopolitical d evelopments in neighboring 
countries limits the growth of exports. The fall in  commodity prices, particularly in oil 
prices, due to the weak global demand is expected t o improve the current account 
balance by restricting the aggregate spending on im ports. Meanwhile, on account of 
the lingering volatility in financial markets and t he sluggish course of confidence 
indices, private final demand contributes to growth  at moderate levels. Therefore, it 
is expected that the projected recovery in economic  activity will be gradual and 
aggregate demand developments will support the disi nflation process. In the case of 
an additional slowdown in external demand and a siz eable decline in global growth 
rates, the decrease in commodity prices will pull i nflation down. Nevertheless, 
domestic economic activity may witness notable adve rse effects at the same time. 
Under such circumstances, the Committee will employ  policy tools to support the 
economy. 
14.  Macroprudential measures taken at the beginning of the year coupled with the tight 
monetary stance continue to have a favorable effect  on the core inflation trend. 
Accordingly, the adverse impact of cumulative excha nge rate developments on 
annual inflation is also tapering off. Although hig h food prices delay the improvement 
in inflation, core inflation trends have displayed a marked decrease compared to the 
elevated levels in the first quarter. In addition, the fall in commodity prices, especially 
in oil prices, has shown a favorable impact on infl ation. In the event that these new 
levels of oil prices prove to be largely permanent,  this channel will support the 
projected disinflation process over the upcoming pe riod.  15.  Under the current monetary policy stance, the Commi ttee anticipates that inflation 
will decline in line with the forecast presented in  the Inflation Report throughout 
2015, at a faster pace in the first half of the yea r. Along with these positive 
developments in the inflation outlook, the currentl y elevated levels of inflation still 
continue to pose upside risks to medium-term expect ations and the pricing behavior. 
In the forthcoming period, inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and other 
factors that affect inflation will be closely monit ored and the tight monetary policy 
stance will be maintained, by keeping the yield cur ve flat, until there is a significant 
improvement in the inflation outlook. 
16.  Global financial markets have followed a volatile c ourse recently. It was stated that 
capital flows to emerging markets may continue to b e volatile in 2015. The ongoing 
uncertainty about the normalization of global monet ary policies cause the global risk 
appetite and capital flows to be data-sensitive. Th e Committee emphasized that the 
CBRT has a rich set of policy tools to use against an earlier-than-expected policy rate 
hike by the Fed.  
17.  Yet, with the global economic slowdown the normaliz ation of monetary policies 
might be postponed. In an environment of continued uncertainty over global 
financial markets and economic activity, it is cruc ial to support prudential borrowing 
to limit the accumulation of macrofinancial risks. In this respect, the Committee 
pointed out the downward trend in long-term interes t rates at the global level. It was 
stated that this trend has been directing banks to use more long-term borrowing 
under current market circumstances. The Committee m embers also stated that the 
implementation of the measures intended for discour aging short-term borrowing by 
the first quarter of 2015 will offer additional ben efits for financial stability. 
18.  Developments on the fiscal policy and tax adjustmen ts are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. T he baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal disc ipline will be maintained and there 
will be no unanticipated hikes on administered pric es. A revision of the monetary 
policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from 
this framework, and consequently, have an adverse e ffect on the medium-term 
inflation outlook. 
19.  The Committee welcomed the development that the new  Medium Term Program 
incorporates disinflation as one of the main object ives. Moreover, it was indicated 
that Turkey’s growth potential would increase gradu ally with the implementation of 
the recently announced structural transformation pr ogram. Any measure to ensure 
the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and red uce the savings deficit will support 
macroeconomic stability and contribute positively t o social welfare by keeping 
interest rates of long-term government securities a t low levels. 
 