No: 2014 – 23                Release Date: 24 April  2014 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: April 24, 2014 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu.  
 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to set the short term 
interest rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate has been kept at 12 percent, the 
interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via repo transactions 
has been kept at 11.5 percent, and borrowing rate h as been kept at 8 percent. 
b) One-week repo rate has been kept at 10 percent. 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing 
rate has been kept at 0 percent, while lending rate  has been reduced from 15 percent to 
13.5 percent. 
 
The Committee assessed that the strong and frontloa ded monetary tightening delivered 
at the January interim meeting has contained the ad verse impact of upside risks on the medium 
term inflation expectations. Inflation expectations  and pricing behavior will be closely monitored 
and the tight monetary policy stance will be mainta ined until there is a significant improvement 
in the inflation outlook. 
Recent decline in uncertainties and partial improve ment in the risk premium indicators 
have reduced the need for an additional tightening in liquidity policy. Accordingly, the Committee 
decided to deliver a technical cut in the late liqu idity window lending interest rate.  
Loan growth continues to slow down in response to t he tight monetary policy stance and 
recent macroprudential measures. In line with these  developments, the data regarding the first 
quarter of 2014 indicate some deceleration in priva te final domestic demand. Meanwhile, with 
the help of the recovery in foreign demand, the con tribution of net exports to economic growth is 
expected to increase. The Committee expects that su ch a demand composition will support 
disinflation and lead to a significant improvement in the current account deficit in 2014. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to 
revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five 
working days. 