No: 2014 – 41          Release Date: 24 June 2014 
  
CENTRAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY PRESS RELEAS E  
Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey to use socia l media accounts for financial 
education purposes  
The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (CBRT) w ill use social media 
accounts to facilitate financial education. This st ep is being taken in accordance with 
the framework set out in the Prime Ministry Circula r on “Financial Access, Financial 
Education and Financial Consumer Protection Strateg y and Action Plans” (1) of 5 
June 2014. 
The Prime Ministry Circular entrusts the CBRT with the authority to serve as 
the coordinator/responsible institution for: 
a)  Fostering the Habit of Saving and Encouraging the U se of the Kuru ş (Turkish lira 
coins),  and also 
b)  Financial Education for Media Members.  
Accordingly, the CBRT has already opened the follow ing social media 
accounts: 
Twitter:  @Merkez_Bankasi  (in Turkish) and @CentralBank_TR  (in English), 
Facebook:  Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası , 
YouTube:  Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası , 
Flickr:  Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
The CBRT will be sharing social media content only via the above-mentioned 
social media accounts. It is strongly advised not t o rely on social media messages 
that appear to be posted on behalf of the CBRT or C BRT authorities, yet are posted 
on accounts other than those listed above. 
The Bank’s reputation and moral personality have le gal protection under 
Article 68/III(a) of the CBRT Law No.1211 (2) . It is of utmost importance that social 
media users consider this provision as a legal requ irement while posting messages 
related to the CBRT. 
Contact:  For further information on the use of social media , please contact 
Press Secretary Yücel Yazar Tel No: +90 (312) 507 5 656. Notes to Editors:  
(1)  The Prime Ministry Circular No. 2014/10 on “Financ ial Access, Financial 
Education and Financial Consumer Protection Strateg y and Action Plans”, published 
in the Official Gazette No. 29021 of 5 June 2014, m ay be accessed here.  The 
Financial Education Action Plan for 2014-2017 may b e accessed here . 
(2)  The CBRT Law may be accessed here . 
  
  
CENTRAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY  
PRINCIPLES FOR THE USE OF SOCIAL MEDIA  
A.    TWITTER  
1.     The official Twitter accounts of the Central Ba nk of the Republic of Turkey 
(CBRT) are @Merkez_Bankasi  (in Turkish) and @CentralBank_TR  (in 
English). 
2.     Twitter accounts are primarily intended for inf ormational purposes in the form 
of one-way communication. 
3.     Being followed does not imply follow-back. User s may be followers of the 
CBRT’s Twitter account(s), yet this does not mean t hat they will be followed 
back by the CBRT.    
4.     The CBRT may retweet third party content that m ay be of interest to its 
followers and/or other Twitter users. However, retw eets of third party content 
do not necessarily reflect the CBRT’s official view . 
5.     The CBRT accepts no responsibility for lack of service due to Twitter 
downtime. 
6.     The CBRT does in no way provide any response th rough Twitter to enquiries, 
comments and/or criticisms posted on this platform.  Users should direct 
enquiries, comments and/or criticisms to the CBRT v ia the communication 
form provided on the Bank’s website. 
7.     Posts, comments and/or assessments by the CBRT staff on social media 
accounts other than CBRT’s official Twitter account s reflect the opinions only of the users. The CBRT does not accept legal respon sibility for such 
comments and/or assessments. 
  
B.    FACEBOOK  
1.     The screen name of the CBRT’s Facebook account is Türkiye Cumhuriyet 
Merkez Bankası . 
2.     The Facebook account is primarily intended for informational purposes in the 
form of one-way communication. 
3.     Being followed does not imply follow-back. User s may be followers of the 
CBRT’s Facebook account, yet this does not mean tha t they will be followed 
back by the CBRT. 
4.     The CBRT may share third party content that may  be of interest to its 
followers and/or other Facebook users. However, sha ring third party content 
does not necessarily mean that the content reflects  the CBRT’s official view. 
5.     The CBRT accepts no responsibility for lack of service due to Facebook 
downtime. 
6.     The CBRT does in no way provide any response th rough Facebook to 
enquiries, comments and/or criticisms posted on thi s platform. Users should 
direct enquiries, comments and/or criticisms to the  CBRT via the 
communication form provided on the Bank’s website.   
7.     Posts, comments and/or assessments by the CBRT staff on social media 
accounts other than the CBRT’s official Facebook ac count reflect the opinions 
only of the users. The CBRT does not accept legal r esponsibility for such 
comments and/or assessments. 
  
C.    YOUTUBE  
1.     The screen name of the CBRT’s YouTube account i s Türkiye Cumhuriyet 
Merkez Bankası . 
2.     The YouTube account is primarily intended for i nformational purposes. 3.     Users may subscribe to the CBRT’s publications through its YouTube 
account, yet this does not mean that the CBRT will subscribe to the 
publications of those users. 
4.     The CBRT accepts no responsibility for lack of service due to YouTube 
downtime. 
5.     Posts, comments and/or assessments by the CBRT staff on social media 
accounts other than the CBRT’s official YouTube acc ount reflect the opinions 
only of the users. The CBRT does not accept legal r esponsibility for such 
comments and/or assessments. 
  
D.    FLICKR  
1.     The screen name of the CBRT’s Flickr account is  Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez 
Bankası  and the domain name for this account 
is http://www.flickr.com/photos/merkez_bankasi/ . 
2.     The Flickr account is primarily intended for th e CBRT to provide the public 
with visual elements. The copyright or the right of  use of the visual elements 
posted on the CBRT’s Flickr account belongs to the Bank. Yet, users do not 
have to obtain authorization from the CBRT for the use of these visual 
elements. 
3.     Being followed does not imply follow-back. User s may be followers of the 
CBRT’s Flickr account, yet this does not mean that they will be followed back 
by the CBRT.    
4.     The CBRT accepts no responsibility for lack of service due to Flickr 
downtime. 
5.     Posts, comments and/or assessments by the CBRT staff on social media 
accounts other than the CBRT’s official Flickr acco unt reflect the opinions only 
of the users. The CBRT does not accept legal respon sibility for such 
comments and/or assessments. 
 