No : 2014 – 53  Release Date: 3 September  2014 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING  
Meeting Date: 27 August 2014 
 
Inflation Developments  
1. In July, consumer prices were up 0.45 percent and a nnual inflation increased 
by 0.16 points to 9.32 percent. This increase in an nual inflation was driven 
primarily by prices of services, alcoholic beverage s and tobacco, while the 
high course of food prices continued in this period . The underlying trend of 
services inflation remained elevated, whereas the t rend in core goods 
continued to improve on the back of the fading cumu lative effects of the 
Turkish lira depreciation.  
 
2. Food inflation edged up to 12.56 percent year-on-ye ar. In July, annual inflation 
declined to 12.1 percent in unprocessed food and re ached 13 percent in 
processed food. Although the headline food inflatio n was relatively flat in this 
period, the annual rate of increase in food prices excluding fresh fruits and 
vegetables rose to 15.2 percent. This was mostly at tributed to drought-related 
supply issues.  
 
3. Down to 3.74 percent, the annual increase of energy  prices continued to 
contribute favorably to consumer inflation. Alcohol ic beverages and tobacco 
products added 0.12 points to annual consumer infla tion due to increased 
prices of some cigarette brands.   
 
4. Prices of services surged by 1.20 percent month-on- month, bringing annual 
services inflation up by 0.44 points to 8.62 percen t. In this period, annual 
inflation was up across all subcategories of servic es. In particular, the annual 
inflation in restaurants and hotels continued to ri se in line with food inflation. 
Therefore, the underlying trend of services inflati on soared, curbing the 
improvement in core indices. 
 
5. Annual core goods inflation fell to 11 percent in J uly. After declining in May 
and June, prices of durable goods remained flat in July, driving annual durable 
goods inflation further down. However, annual infla tion continued to rise in 
core goods excluding durables that respond with a l ag to the exchange rate 
pass-through. On a seasonally adjusted basis, the u nderlying trend in core 
goods inflation continued to improve in this period .  
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. Second-quarter data point to a continued moderate g rowth in economic 
activity. On the production side, the industrial pr oduction index recovered its 
April rise in May and increased modestly in June. T hus, production remained 
flat during the second quarter.  
7. On the spending front, domestic private final deman d displays a moderate 
course. The production of consumer goods was higher  quarter-on-quarter, 
whereas the imports of consumer goods were down fro m the previous quarter. 
A similar divergence was noted in the consumption d emand for durable and 
nondurable goods. Automobile sales, an indicator fo r the durable goods 
demand, picked up moderately in the second quarter after the first-quarter 
plunge, and posted a rapid increase in July. Sales of home appliances, on the 
other hand, increased in the second quarter after a  two-quarter slowdown. 
Thus, it is anticipated that the demand for nondura ble goods registered a mild 
increase in the second quarter and the fall in the demand for durable goods 
may have halted. Meanwhile, indicators for machiner y and equipment 
investments suggest that investments remain weak. M oreover, indicators for 
construction investments do not show any recovery a t this point. 
8. Recent data suggest that the contribution of export s to growth may decrease 
in the upcoming period. The non-gold export volume index posted a monthly 
decline in June for the first time in a long while due to the geopolitical tensions 
in Iraq, Turkey’s second largest export destination , as well as due to the 
slowing economic activity in the euro area. These f actors are likely to continue 
to put downside pressure on external demand for som e time. In fact, leading 
indicators signal some slowdown in exports for the third quarter of the year.    
9. In seasonally adjusted terms, total and nonfarm une mployment rates were 
higher in May 2014 than in the previous period. The  rise in unemployment 
rates was largely due to the slowing nonfarm employ ment. In this period, 
industrial employment remained unchanged from the p revious month, while 
construction employment declined. Moreover, the rat e of increase in services 
employment slowed. Leading indicators for the third  quarter signal no 
significant recovery for employment. The low levels  of investment tendency 
suggest that a recovery in the labor market may tak e some time. 
10. In sum, domestic demand remains moderate while exte rnal demand loses 
momentum. Thus, economic activity is expected to ha ve flattened in the 
second quarter after the robust quarterly growth in  the first quarter. Survey indicators suggest that economic activity will rema in moderate in the third 
quarter as well. Therefore, demand developments are  not expected to put 
pressure on inflation in the upcoming period. Meanw hile, the improvement in 
the current account deficit may decelerate to some extent due to the slowdown 
in external demand growth.  
Monetary Policy and Risks  
11. The Committee assessed that the recent growth rate and the composition of loans 
evolve in the desired direction, owing to the tight  monetary policy stance and 
macroprudential measures. Annual rate of growth in consumer loans continue to 
decrease, while commercial loan growth is relativel y more robust. The current 
pace and composition of loans not only contain medi um-term inflation pressures 
but also support the improvement in the current acc ount balance. The Committee 
stated that the partial easing in financial conditi ons besides the decline in 
domestic uncertainties may affect the credit market  positively in the upcoming 
period. Meanwhile, food prices surging amid drought  coupled with the ongoing 
geopolitical risks may limit the increase in the co nsumer confidence and the credit 
demand in the short term. 
12. The adverse impact of cumulative exchange rate deve lopments since mid-2013 
on annual inflation is gradually tapering off. Havi ng exceeded 3 percentage points 
in April, these effects are estimated to ease to ar ound 2.5 percentage points as of 
July. The Committee highlighted that there is a con siderable room for decline in 
inflation through this channel in 2015. However, it  was also underlined that 
second round effects of the exchange rate pass-thro ugh should be closely 
monitored. 
13. The high course of food prices delays the improveme nt in the inflation outlook. 
In this respect, the Committee also evaluated the p ossible impact of the 
drought and the geopolitical risks on the inflation  outlook. The Committee 
underlined that domestic food prices had recently d ecoupled from those 
abroad in a negative way. The food group has seen m arked price increases 
since the start of the year, and no apparent correc tion is expected in the short 
term, partly due to the geopolitical risks. Given t hat the current elevated levels 
of inflation affect the medium-term expectations ad versely and add on the 
risks to the pricing behavior, all relevant institu tions’ involvement with the fight 
against inflation is deemed crucial for macroeconom ic stability. In this scope, it 
was mentioned that an active foreign trade policy m ight be helpful in 
containing risks to food prices. 14. In line with these assessments, the Committee decid ed to maintain the current 
stance regarding short-term interest rates. Inflati on expectations, pricing behavior 
and other factors that affect inflation will be clo sely monitored and the tight 
monetary policy stance will be maintained, by keepi ng a flat yield curve, until there 
is a significant improvement in the inflation outlo ok. Accordingly, the Committee 
reminded that the liquidity policy may be used acti vely when needed. 
15. The Committee highlighted that long-term interest r ates had recently become less 
volatile amid the alleviation of uncertainties rega rding global monetary policies. 
Coupled with unwinding domestic uncertainties, this  has partially eased the need 
for a wide interest rate corridor. Accordingly, the  Committee decided to reduce the 
overnight lending rate to render the interest rate corridor more symmetric.  
16. The Committee closely monitors developments on the fiscal policy and tax 
adjustments with regard to their effects on the inf lation outlook. The baseline 
monetary stance is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be 
maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes  on administered prices in the 
forthcoming period. A revision of the monetary poli cy stance may be considered, 
should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from  this framework, and 
consequently, have an adverse effect on the medium- term inflation outlook.   
17. Strengthening structural reforms that will ensure t he sustainability of the fiscal 
discipline and reduce the savings deficit will supp ort macroeconomic stability in 
the medium term. Steps taken in this regard will al so provide more room for 
maneuvering the monetary policy and improving socia l welfare by keeping interest 
rates of long-term government securities at low lev els. In this respect, 
implementing the structural reforms required by the  Medium Term Program 
remains to be of utmost importance.  
 