No: 2014 – 40             Release Date: 24 June 201 4 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: June 24, 2014 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu.  
 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to set the short term 
interest rates as follows: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate has been kept at 12 percent, the 
interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via repo transactions 
has been kept at 11.5 percent, and borrowing rate h as been kept at 8 percent. 
b) One-week repo rate has been reduced from 9.5 per cent to 8.75 percent. 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing 
rate has been kept at 0 percent, and lending rate h as been kept at 13.5 percent. 
 
Loan growth continues at reasonable levels in respo nse to the tight monetary policy 
stance and macroprudential measures. In line with t hese developments, recent data indicate to 
a modest course in private final domestic demand. M eanwhile, with the help of the recovery in 
foreign demand, exports contribute positively to ec onomic growth. The Committee expects that 
such a demand composition will support disinflation  and will lead to a significant improvement in 
the current account balance in 2014. 
The adverse impact of exchange rate developments si nce mid-2013 on annual inflation 
will gradually taper off. With the contribution of base effects, inflation is expected to decline 
markedly starting from this month. 
In light of these assessments and the recent improv ement in global liquidity conditions, 
the Committee decided to deliver a measured cut in the one-week repo rate. Inflation 
expectations, pricing behavior and other factors th at affect inflation will be closely monitored and 
the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained , by keeping a flat yield curve, until there is a 
significant improvement in the inflation outlook. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to 
revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five 
working days. 