 
No: 2014 – 43  Release Date: 1 July 2014 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 24 June 2014 
 
Inflation Developments  
1. In May, consumer prices edged up by 0.40 percent  month-on-month, and 
annual inflation reached 9.66 percent. This uptick in annual inflation was 
driven by the course of food and core goods prices.  In this period, cumulative 
effects of the depreciation in the Turkish lira wan ed and the annual rate of 
increase in core inflation indicators followed a re latively flat course. 
 
2. Annual food group inflation climbed by 1 percent age points to 14.11 percent 
amid soaring prices of unprocessed food group, the annual inflation of which 
reached 17.1 percent. On the processed food front, prices of bread and 
cereals continued with an upsurge, while the uptren d in other processed food 
products lost pace. As of May, the contribution of food prices to annual 
consumer inflation reached 3.4 percentage points. O n the other hand, energy 
prices continued with a relatively favorable path w ith an annual increase of 
4.62 percent. 
 
3. Prices of services rose by 0.67 percent month-on -month, and the group’s 
annual inflation edged down to 8.52 percent in May.  Annual inflation in 
restaurants-hotels and rents recorded an increase c ontrary to the decline in 
other sub-items of services. The seasonally adjuste d data point to a downward 
trend, yet persisting high levels in the underlying  trend of services inflation. 
 
4. Annual core goods inflation crept up by 0.29 per centage points to 11.39 
percent in May. Following the appreciation in the A pril-May period, prices of 
durable consumer goods registered a month-on-month decline for the first time 
since the start of the year. Meanwhile, annual infl ation in core goods, 
excluding durable goods remained on the rise, witne ssing the effects of the 
exchange rate with a further lag. The seasonally-ad justed data indicated a 
slight improvement in the underlying trend of the c ore goods inflation. 
   
Factors Affecting Inflation 
 
5. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) data for the first quarter of 2014 proved 
broadly consistent with the outlook presented in th e April Inflation Report. The 
public sector compensated for the fall in private s ector demand, leading the 
final domestic demand to follow a flat course. Expo rts of goods and services 
continued to expand at a robust pace, while imports  registered a quarterly 
decline. Thus, net exports appeared as the main dri ver of quarterly growth in 
the first quarter, and the rebalancing process amon g demand components 
continued as projected. 
 
6. Data for the first quarter of 2014 point to a mo derate increase in economic 
activity. On the production side, the industrial pr oduction index posted a 
month-on-month increase by 1.0 percent following a slight fall in the preceding 
two months. Thus, production maintained a steady tr end of quarterly increase 
by exceeding the average of the previous quarter in  the April. The upcoming 
period is expected to witness an ongoing modest ris e in production with the 
support of exports and a rebound in the private dom estic demand. 
 
7. Data on the expenditure side exhibit a modest co urse in final private domestic 
demand in the second quarter. Among the indicators of consumption demand, 
the production and exports of non-durable goods ros e, whereas the imports 
thereof declined quarter-on-quarter in April. Produ ction and imports of durable 
goods recorded higher figures on a quarterly basis in April. Among indicators 
of consumption of durable goods, sales of automobil es displayed a flat course 
following a plunge in the first quarter, while the sales of white goods recorded 
an increase in the April-May period following an in terval of two quarters. Thus, 
it is considered that the uptrend in the demand for  non-durable goods 
continued in the second quarter, and that the fall in demand for durable goods 
may have halted. Indicators of machinery-equipment investments point to a 
flat course in the second quarter. Moreover, the da ta regarding construction 
investments show that the construction investments continued with a 
decelerating pace. 
 
8. Owing to reduced perceptions of uncertainty, rec overed confidence indices 
and improved financial conditions, consumption dema nd is projected to post 
better figures and final private domestic demand is  expected to settle on a 
track of gradual increase starting from second quar ter. 
  9. Recent data show that exports continued to grow in the second quarter of 
2014 and contributed positively to growth owing als o to the recovery in foreign 
demand. Having increased month-on-month in April, t he export volume index 
excluding gold went above the average of the previo us quarter. Due to the 
recent global recovery pointed by survey indicators  and the improvement in 
world trade, exports are envisaged to support growt h further in the upcoming 
period. However, the geopolitical developments in I raq pose downside risks 
regarding the contribution of exports to growth in the second quarter. 
 
10. The ongoing upsurge in employment since Novembe r 2013 lost pace in March 
and seasonally-adjusted unemployment rates followed  a flat course. Industrial 
and construction employment paused in this period, while non-farm 
employment rose on the back of the services sector.  Leading indicators on the 
second quarter point to a mild increase in employme nt. 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
11. Loan growth continues at reasonable levels in r esponse to the tight monetary 
policy stance and macroprudential measures. Consume r loans grew well 
below the historical averages in the first half of the year, while the deceleration 
in the growth of commercial loans remained relative ly limited. The Committee 
stated that by limiting excessive consumption, the current growth composition 
of loans not only curbed inflation but also support ed rebalancing. 
12. In line with these developments, recent data in dicate a modest course in 
private final domestic demand. Meanwhile, with the help of the recovery in 
foreign demand, exports contribute positively to ec onomic growth. The 
Committee expects that such a demand composition wi ll support disinflation 
and will lead to a significant improvement in the c urrent account balance in 
2014. 
13. The adverse impact of exchange rate development s since mid-2013 on annual 
inflation will taper off. In fact, amid alleviated inflationary pressures stemming 
from the exchange rate, the underlying trend of cor e inflation indicators 
trended downwards particularly in durable goods for  the first time after a long 
time in May. With the contribution of base effects,  inflation is expected to 
decline markedly starting from this month. The Comm ittee stated that the 
cumulative impact of food inflation and the exchang e rate pass-through to 
annual headline inflation reached around 6.5 percen tage points, which 
constitutes a considerable room for disinflation in  the medium term. 
Meanwhile, the Committee added that the effects of the ongoing high inflation 
rates on the pricing behavior needed to be closely monitored. 14. The meeting also involved a discussion on the p robable impact of the recent 
geopolitical developments on the current account ba lance and inflation. It was 
assessed that should uncertainties persist in Iraq,  exports and oil prices 
channels may lead to a slowdown in the rebalancing process. Similarly, it was 
mentioned that if higher energy prices persist, it may lead to a limited impact 
on inflation. The Committee stated that providing a  monetary policy reaction to 
the geopolitical uncertainties at this stage would not be appropriate; yet these 
developments should be closely monitored. 
15. In the light of these assessments and the recen t improvement in global 
liquidity conditions, the Committee decided to deli ver a measured cut in the 
one-week repo rate. Inflation expectations, pricing  behavior and other factors 
that affect inflation will be closely monitored and  the tight monetary policy 
stance will be maintained by keeping a flat yield c urve until there is a 
significant improvement in the inflation outlook. 
16. The Committee closely monitors developments on fiscal policy and tax 
adjustments with regard to their effects on the inf lation outlook. The baseline 
monetary stance is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will 
be maintained and there will be no unanticipated hi kes on administered prices 
in the forthcoming period. A revision of the moneta ry policy stance may be 
considered, should the fiscal stance deviate signif icantly from this framework, 
and consequently, have an adverse effect on the med ium-term inflation 
outlook. 
17. Strengthening structural reforms that will ensu re the sustainability of the fiscal 
discipline and reduce the savings deficit will supp ort macroeconomic stability 
in the medium term. Steps taken in this regard will  also provide more room for 
maneuvering the monetary policy and improving socia l welfare by keeping 
interest rates of long-term government securities a t low levels. In this respect, 
implementing the structural reforms required by the  Medium Term Program 
remains to be of utmost importance. 