No: 2014 – 56                                                        
Release Date: 20 September 2014  
 
THE CENTRAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY PRESS RELEASE  
New CBRT website open for test use.  
The CBRT website, an important channel of communication with the public, has been 
redesigned and opened for test use at http://yeni.tcmb.gov.tr . The new site has been 
restructured so as to bring the Bank’s price stability an d financial stability objectives, 
as well as its main functions, to the forefront. Accordingly, the menu selection and 
page contents have been revised and rearranged  to meet the needs of users of the 
website. Furthermore, new features such as the For Child ren (in Turkish only) section 
and an Interactive Graphs  facility have been added.  
The new site will be in service concurrently with the present one till Saturday, 27 
September 2014, after which it will be the sole active site. During the test period, data  
provided through www.tcmb.gov.tr  shall be the officially recognized information. 
Users are welcome to provide their opinions and suggestions through e -mail to 
tcmbtest@tcmb.gov.tr . 
With the launch of the new website, the CBRT Exchange Rates will no longer be 
published in HTML format, but only in XML format. Exchange Rates published in 
XML format will be accessible at the previous address 
(http://www.tcmb.gov.tr/kurlar/201401/02012014.xml ). 
We would like to remind users that utilize the exchange rates published on the CBRT 
website in HTML format on various websites and applications to make the neces sary 
arrangements using the XML files* given at the links below.  
Indicative Exchange Rates – Sample XML File  
Informative Exchange Rates of Selected Currencies That Are Not Subject to 
Transaction by the Central Bank of the Republic  of Turkey – Sample XML File  *: In order to display the XML files, users may right click on the links and use the 
“save link as” option.  
 
Contact: For further information, please contact Press Secretary Yücel Yazar  
Tel No: +90 (312) 507 5656  
 