No: 2014-04                Release Date: 28 January  2014 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: 21 January 2014 
 
Inflation Developments  
1. In December, consumer prices increased by 0.46 p ercent, while annual 
inflation rose to 7.40 percent. Energy prices were influential in this 
development and there was no significant change in the contribution of other 
main groups to the rise in annual inflation. In thi s period, core inflation 
indicators continued to follow a downward course as  in November. 
2. Annual food group inflation receded to 9.67 perc ent. In December, annual 
unprocessed food group inflation remained flat at 1 2.88 percent, while items 
other than fresh fruits and vegetables saw widespre ad price hikes. Processed 
food prices increased by 0.73 percent due to the br ead and cereals group, 
while the group’s annual inflation declined to 7.11  percent. Leading indicators 
for January suggest that annual food group inflatio n will remain elevated 
because of the impact of adverse weather conditions  on fresh fruit and 
vegetable prices. 
3. In December, energy prices rose by 2.35 percent mainly owing to sharp 
increases in LPG and bottled gas prices. Moreover, the recent depreciation of 
the Turkish lira caused gas and diesel prices to ri se. As a result, annual 
energy inflation recorded the lowest year-end level  of the last four years 
despite rising to 5.15 percent. 
4. In December, services prices increased by 0.39 p ercent, and the group’s 
annual inflation came in at 7.98 percent. The Monet ary Policy Committee (the 
Committee) judged that, despite the favorable cours e of energy inflation 
throughout the year, wage increases and the recover y in domestic demand 
were influential in the rise of services inflation.  However, it is noted that recent 
seasonally adjusted data indicate a slowdown in the  underlying trend of 
services inflation.  
5. Meanwhile, annual core goods inflation fell to 6 .20 percent in December due to 
the downward contribution of clothing prices and th e waning effects of the 
Turkish lira depreciation. Seasonally adjusted data  also showed that the 
underlying trend of the group’s inflation was on a downward path. However, 
the resumed depreciation of the Turkish lira as of mid-December and January’s tax adjustments for automobiles may deter iorate the outlook for core 
goods inflation. In fact, leading indicators have r ecently pointed to a significant 
increase in prices of durable goods, especially aut omobiles.  
6. In sum, given that core inflation indicators may  show a marked increase in 
January, it is noted that inflation will remain sig nificantly above the 5 percent 
target in the short term due to unfavorable food pr ices as well.  
 
  Factors Affecting Inflation 
7. Recent data releases suggest that final domestic  demand continued to grow 
moderately in the fourth quarter. The industrial pr oduction index compensated 
the October fall with a rise in November. Although recently there have been 
sharp volatilities in seasonally adjusted industria l production due to religious 
holidays, on the whole, the industrial production i ndex posted a modest 
increase. It should be noted that this trend is alm ost equal to the average 
growth rate seen since early 2012.  
8. The moderate trend in private consumption demand  continued in the last 
quarter of the year. Production of consumer goods w as down while imports of 
consumer goods were up during October-November comp ared to the previous 
quarter. Automobile sales were higher throughout th e fourth quarter than the 
average of the previous quarter. Total sales of aut omobiles and light 
commercial vehicles suggest that vehicle sales were  virtually flat over the 
fourth quarter. While down from the previous quarte r, sales of appliances 
remained elevated in the fourth quarter. 
9. Indicators for investment demand followed a rela tively favorable path in the 
final quarter. Production of capital goods went sli ghtly up during October-
November compared to the previous quarter. Producti on of capital goods 
excluding vehicles, an indicator for the underlying  trend, posted a larger 
increase than total capital goods. Similarly, there  were increases in imports of 
capital goods as well. The expectation for fixed ca pital investment spending 
asked in the Business Tendency Survey continued to rise for the fourth 
consecutive month and surpassed the third-quarter l evel in the fourth quarter. 
10. Survey indicators for the final quarter suggest  that economic activity continues 
to recover. In fact, both the Business Tendency Sur vey’s past-three-month 
production question and the PMI index exceeded thei r third-quarter averages. 
The BTS’ three-month-ahead order expectations incre ased significantly for 
both domestic and export markets.  11. Recent indicators suggest that exports continue  to grow modestly. In fact, the 
non-gold export volume index was up in October-Nove mber from the third-
quarter average. PMI indicators point to a global r ecovery, while world import 
demand is surging. The recovery of the euro area, T urkey’s leading trading 
partner accounting for a substantial portion of Tur kish exports, and the 
improving global growth outlook indicate that net e xports may make a positive 
contribution to growth in the upcoming period. 
12. The Committee stated that the recent hike in ri sk premiums and exchange 
rates might put pressure on private demand in the f irst quarter of 2014. In fact, 
the preliminary CNBC-e consumer confidence index fo r the first fifteen days of 
January shows deterioration in consumer sentiment a bout current economic 
conditions and future expectations. However, it is noted that the expected 
recovery of external demand will restrict the slowd own in total demand. 
Accordingly, the composition of growth is expected to support the decline in 
both inflation and current account balance in the u pcoming period. 
13. Seasonally adjusted unemployment rates fell in October 2013 thanks to 
growing non-farm employment. Although the uptrend i n unemployment halted, 
the rise in non-farm employment is restricted to ce rtain sectors. Employment 
remains weak in the industrial sector, while the in crease in non-farm 
employment came mostly from construction and servic es sectors. Leading 
indicators for labor markets show signs of a modera tely growing employment 
for November and December. Yet, global economic unc ertainties and 
domestic political developments may remain a constr aint to investment and 
employment growth for the upcoming period 
 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
14. The meeting involved an assessment of the Janua ry Inflation Report forecasts. 
According to the Committee, recent data suggest tha t final domestic demand 
and exports continued to grow at a moderate pace du ring the fourth quarter. It 
was stated that the cautious monetary policy stance , the announced 
macroprudential measures, and weak capital flows le ad to a gradual slowdown 
in loan growth. Combined with the impact of recent domestic uncertainties, 
private demand is expected to slow down in the firs t quarter. Meanwhile, the 
expected recovery in the economic activity in Europ e should have a positive 
impact on the external demand. Accordingly, the dec line in the current account 
deficit excluding gold trade is expected to be more  significant in 2014. 15. The Committee closely monitors the impact of th e recent increase in the risk 
premium on the inflation outlook and expectations. Inflation is likely to hover 
above the 5 percent target for some time due to rec ent tax adjustments and 
lagged effects of exchange rate developments. Moreo ver, the volatility in 
unprocessed food prices adds to the uncertainty reg arding inflation forecasts.  
16. The Committee stated that the liquidity stance should be tightened to align 
inflation outlook with the medium term targets. It was indicated that, given the 
recently heightened uncertainties, designing a flex ible mechanism would be 
more appropriate. To this end, it was stated that i nterbank money market 
interest rates will materialize at 9 percent during  additional monetary tightening 
days, instead of 7.75 percent. In this respect, Cen tral Bank lending rate (the 
marginal funding rate) will be announced and implem ented at 9 percent, 
instead of 7.75 percent during the additional tight ening days.  
17. Moreover, the Committee indicated that the uppe r limit of the amount of 
funding provided at stable funding rate-1 may be re moved due to the 
increased funding need of the financial system in t he recent period. 
18. The Committee closely monitors inflation expect ations and the pricing 
behavior. The slowdown in domestic demand is expect ed to contain the effect 
of the cost-push shocks on inflation to some extent  in the coming period. 
However, lagged effects of the exchange rate moveme nts and the unfavorable 
course of food prices are likely to cause inflation  to remain above the target for 
an extended period, which may result in higher rigi dity in expectations and 
stronger inflation inertia. Materialization of such  a scenario and deterioration of 
pricing behavior may prompt the Committee to implem ent the necessary 
tightening in the monetary policy stance. 
19. On the other hand, should these uncertainties a nd the increase in the risk 
premium last for a long time, the economy may face a pronounced slowdown 
through the confidence and balance-sheet channels. Should such a risk 
materialize, the Central Bank will pursue a stabili zing policy by using its policy 
instruments to reduce the intermediation costs of t he banks. 
20. The Committee closely monitors developments on fiscal policy and tax 
adjustments with regard to their effects on the inf lation outlook. Inflation 
forecasts presented in the baseline scenario take t he framework outlined in 
the Medium Term Program as given. Accordingly, it i s assumed that fiscal 
discipline will be maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in 
administered prices in the forthcoming period. A re vision of the monetary 
policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this framework, and consequently, has an adver se effect on the medium-
term inflation outlook. 
21. Maintaining the cautious stance in fiscal and f inancial sector policies is critical 
to the resilience of our economy against current un certainties. Strengthening 
structural reforms that will ensure the sustainabil ity of the fiscal discipline and 
reduce the savings deficit will support macroeconom ic stability in the medium 
term. Steps taken in this regard will also provide more room for maneuvering 
the monetary policy and improve social welfare by k eeping interest rates of 
long-term government securities permanently at low levels. In this respect, 
implementation of the structural reforms required b y the Medium Term 
Program remains to be of utmost importance. 
 
 