No: 2014 - 18 
Release Date: 25 March 2014 
 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
 
Meeting Date: 18 March 2014 
 
Inflation Developments 
1. In February, consumer prices rose by 0.43 percen t, and annual inflation 
increased by 0.14 percentage points to 7.89 percent . Core inflation indicators 
displayed an upsurge amid the depreciation in the T urkish lira. Inflation 
indicators are expected to remain high in the upcom ing period due to the 
unfavorable course of the food prices and the lagge d effects of the exchange 
rate pass-through. 
 
2. Annual food group inflation fell by 0.83 percent age points to 10.05 percent. In 
February, unprocessed food prices decreased due to vegetable prices. 
Nevertheless, the unfavorable outlook in unprocesse d food prices excluding 
fresh fruits and vegetables continued, and the annu al rate of price increases in 
this group stood at 24.21 percent. Processed food p rices increased by 1.65 
percent on a monthly basis amid the price increases  that spread across the 
group, the largest increases being in the bread-cer eals item. As a 
consequence, the group’s annual inflation climbed t o 9.42 percent. Meanwhile, 
the rainfall rate has remained below the seasonal a verages in various areas 
lately, leaving the upside risks to food prices bri sk. 
 
3. Prices of services edged up by 0.77 percent, and  the group’s annual inflation 
increased by 0.38 percentage points to 8.34 percent  in February. These 
figures indicated that the services inflation has h it the highest level since the 
first quarter of 2009. The seasonally adjusted data  pointed to a persisting rise 
in the underlying trend of services inflation in th is period as well.  
 
4. Annual core goods inflation increased by 1.28 pe rcentage points to 8.39 
percent in February. This was mainly driven by the rising prices of durable 
goods, particularly automobiles, reflecting the eff ects of the past depreciation 
in the Turkish lira. The seasonally-adjusted data p ointed to a higher trend in 
the core goods inflation compared to January. Core inflation indicators 
registered a similar outlook as well. 
5. Against this background, inflation is expected t o remain on the rise in the 
upcoming months, partly reflecting base effects. 
     Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. Industrial production increased remarkably in Ja nuary compared to December. 
This increase owes to the recovery from December’s weak base as well as to 
rising export orders and improved export expectatio ns driven by the relative 
pickup in external demand. Compared with the fourth -quarter average, 
January’s production levels are stronger. Yet, the economic activity is 
expected to moderate in coming months due to the re percussions of the weak 
domestic demand on economic activity. 
7. In recent months, global and domestic uncertaint ies and the resulting increase 
in risk premiums and exchange rates caused consumer  confidence to plunge. 
In addition, the tightening in financial conditions  has led to a slowdown in 
consumer loan growth rates. Available data indicate  that sales of appliances 
and automobiles have been falling recently as well.  Thus, the imports and 
production of durable consumer goods were significa ntly down in January 
compared to the previous month and quarter.  
8. After following a favorable trend in 2013, inves tment demand has lost some 
pace due to recent developments. Expectations for f ixed capital investment fell 
to the lowest level since 2010, while the productio n of capital goods excluding 
vehicles, an indicator for the underlying trend of investments, dropped 
markedly month-on-month in January. Similarly, sale s of commercial vehicles 
slowed down.  
9. Recent data show that exports continued to grow in the first quarter of 2014. 
The export volume index was up in January from both  December and the 
fourth-quarter average. With the support of the glo bal recovery, the robust 
international import demand, and the Turkish lira d epreciation, exports are 
expected to make a positive contribution to growth in the upcoming period.  
10. In sum, recent data releases indicate that fina l domestic demand will lose 
momentum, whereas exports will limit the impact of this slowdown on growth. 
Against this background, the Committee expects the rebalancing to continue 
and the current account deficit to improve substant ially in 2014.  
 
11. In seasonally adjusted terms, total and non-far m unemployment rates were 
down in December 2013 compared to the previous peri od. This drop in 
unemployment rates was mostly driven by the upsurge  in non-farm 
employment. Employment basically increased across s ervices and 
construction sectors. Industrial employment, on the  other hand, increased only 
slightly and remained relatively weak.  Monetary Policy and Risks 
12. The Committee assessed that upward risks on the  inflation outlook remain 
important. Lagged impact of the exchange pass-throu gh continues to exert 
upside pressures on core inflation, especially thro ugh core goods prices. 
Services inflation and other indicators regarding p ricing behavior also suggest 
that underlying inflation rate is significantly abo ve the target. The strong and 
frontloaded monetary tightening delivered at the Ja nuary interim meeting has 
contained the potential adverse impact of the upsid e risks on the medium term 
inflation expectations. Yet, the impact of monetary  tightening on inflation will 
be observed with some lag. In the meanwhile, inflat ion is expected to increase 
until June, partly reflecting the base effects. Aga inst this backdrop, inflation 
expectations and pricing behavior will be closely m onitored and the tight 
monetary policy stance will be maintained until the re is a significant 
improvement in the inflation outlook. 
13. Loan growth continues to slow down in response to the tight monetary policy 
stance, recent macroprudential measures, and weak c apital flows. The 
Committee indicated that the slowdown in loan growt h can be mostly attributed 
to consumer loans and credit cards, noting that Tur kish lira commercial loans 
continue to expand at a robust pace. The pronounced  tightening in financial 
conditions observed in the first quarter suggests t hat the deceleration trend in 
loan growth will continue. The Committee members po inted that it will be 
useful to closely monitor the supply and demand fac tors driving loan market in 
the forthcoming period.  
14. In line with the developments in loan growth, d ata regarding the first quarter of 
2014 indicate some deceleration in private final do mestic demand. Meanwhile, 
with the help of the recovery in foreign demand, ne t exports are expected to 
contribute positively to economic growth. The Commi ttee expects that such a 
demand composition will contain upside inflationary  pressures and lead to a 
significant improvement in the current account defi cit in 2014. 
15. The Committee stated that despite the moderate expansion in the economic 
activity, consumption and investment indicators sho w some relative 
weakening. The Committee members indicated that the  weakening in demand 
indicators has not been significantly reflected in the economic activity at this 
point. However, as indicated in one of the risk sce narios of the Inflation 
Report, the risk of a marked slowdown in the econom ic activity through the 
confidence and balance sheet channels, caused by th e possible persistence 
of existing uncertainties and elevated risk premium s, should not be 
overlooked. It was reminded that the Central Bank h as many tools to implement countercyclical policy, should such a ris k materialize. In this respect 
reserve requirements, reserve option mechanism and liquidity policies may be 
utilized, if needed.  
16. The Committee has also evaluated the possibilit y of paying interest to the 
portion of reserve requirements held in Turkish lir as, in the context of the 
normalization of monetary policy. It was stated tha t, such a measure could be 
considered at a future date if deemed necessary. Mo reover, implications of 
paying partial interest to reserve requirements wer e assessed in different 
dimensions, with regard to its interaction with the  reserve option mechanism. 
In light of these assessments, it was indicated tha t any decision regarding the 
payment of partial interest to reserve requirements  to be implemented in the 
future should be measured and limited.  
17. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developmen ts and tax adjustments 
closely with regard to their effects on the inflati on outlook. The baseline 
monetary policy stance is formulated under the assu mption that fiscal 
discipline will be sustained and there will be no u nanticipated hikes in 
administered prices. A revision in the monetary pol icy stance may be 
considered, should the fiscal stance deviate signif icantly from this framework 
and consequently have an adverse effect on the medi um-term inflation 
outlook. 
18. Maintaining the cautious stance in fiscal and f inancial sector policies is critical 
to the resilience of our economy against current un certainties. Strengthening 
structural reforms that will ensure the sustainabil ity of the fiscal discipline and 
reduce the savings deficit will support macroeconom ic stability in the medium 
term. Steps taken in this regard will also provide more room for maneuvering 
the monetary policy and improve social welfare by k eeping interest rates of 
long-term government securities at low levels. In t his respect, implementation 
of the structural reforms required by the Medium Te rm Program remains to be 
of utmost importance. 
 
 