   
 
No: 2014-77  
PRESS RELEASE  
24 December 2014 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Başçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin,  Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet 
Yörükoğlu.  
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to keep the short term interest rates 
constant at the following levels: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate at 11.25 percent, the interest rate on 
borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers v ia repo transactions at 10.75 percent, and 
borrowing rate at 7.5 percent, 
b)  One-week repo rate at 8.25 percent, 
c)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing rate at 0 
percent, and lending rate at 12.75 percent. 
Loan growth continues at reasonable levels in respo nse to the tight monetary policy stance and 
macroprudential measures. The favorable development s in the terms of trade and the moderate 
course of consumer loans will contribute to the imp rovement in the current account balance. 
External demand remains weak, while the contributio n of domestic demand to growth is at 
moderate levels. The Committee assessed that the im plementation of the announced structural 
reforms would contribute to the potential growth si gnificantly. 
Macroprudential measures taken at the beginning of the year and the tight monetary policy stance 
continue to have a favorable impact on the core inf lation trend. Moreover, declining commodity 
prices, in particular oil prices, will contribute t o disinflation.  
Under the current monetary policy stance, the Commi ttee anticipates that, inflation will decline in 
line with the forecast presented in the Inflation R eport throughout 2015, at a faster pace in the firs t 
half of the year. Inflation expectations, pricing b ehavior and other factors that affect inflation wil l be 
closely monitored and the tight monetary policy sta nce will be maintained, by keeping a flat yield 
curve, until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to revise its 
stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five working days. 
 
