 
No: 2014 – 14  Release Date: 18  March 2014 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  
Meeting Date: March 18, 2014 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Ba şçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin, 
Abdullah Yava ş, Mehmet Yörüko ğlu.  
 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to keep the short term 
interest rates constant at the following levels: 
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate at 12 percent, the interest rate on 
borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers v ia repo transactions at 11.5 percent, 
and borrowing rate at 8 percent, 
b) One-week repo rate at 10 percent, 
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4: 00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing 
rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 15 percent. 
 
The Committee highlighted the upside risks on the i nflation outlook and assessed that 
the strong and frontloaded monetary tightening deli vered at the January interim meeting has 
contained the adverse impact of such risks on the m edium term inflation expectations. Yet, 
inflation is expected to increase until June, partl y reflecting base effects. Against this backdrop, 
inflation expectations and pricing behavior will be  closely monitored and the tight monetary 
policy stance will be maintained until there is a s ignificant improvement in the inflation outlook. 
Loan growth continues to slow down in response to t he tight monetary policy stance, 
recent macroprudential measures, and weak capital f lows. In line with these developments, the 
data regarding the first quarter of 2014 indicate s ome deceleration in private final domestic 
demand. Meanwhile, with the help of the recovery in  foreign demand, the contribution of net 
exports to economic growth is expected to increase.  The Committee expects that such a 
demand composition will support disinflation and le ad to a significant improvement in the current 
account deficit in 2014. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to 
revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five 
working days. 