SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date : 17 July 2014 
         Inflation Developments  
1. In June, consumer prices increased by 0.31 percent and annual inflation 
declined to 9.16 percent. This decrease in annual inflation was driven primarily 
by food prices , but also by  energy and services prices. In this period, the 
cumulative effects of the T urkish lira depreciation continued to weaken and the 
uptrend that started in the annual core goods inflation in early January 
stopped . Thus, the annual inflation in core indicators followed a relatively flat 
course.  
  
2. Annual food group inflation fell by 1. 6 points to 12.47 percent , mainly on the 
back of the unprocessed food group whose annual inflation decreased by 4.4 
points due to base effects , while the introduction of new  fresh fruit s to the 
index  limited  the decline in the group’s inflation. On the processed food front, 
rapid increases prevailed across all subcategories, particularly in bread and 
cereals, and annual inflation rose to 12.2 percent. The elevated food prices 
have been the main factor limitin g the pace of decline in inflation . In fact, 
excluding the food group, the underlying consumer inflation  trend  has been 
slowing. On the other hand, the energy group continued to contribute 
favorably to consumer inflation with an annual increase of 4.25 per cent.  
 
3. Prices of services rose by 0.88 percent in June, and the group’s annual 
inflation edged down by 0.34 points to 8.18 percent. Annual inflation in 
restaurants -hotels, rents and transport were up in this period, while the decline 
in inflation was main ly driven by the base effect from driving school  fees. 
Seasonally adjusted data point to a slowing yet still high  underlying services 
inflation  trend  for June.  
 
4. Annual core goods inflation remained flat at 11.4 percent in June. Following 
the appreciation o f the Turkish lira during April -May, prices of durable goods 
dropped for the second consecutive month, and the group’s annual inflation 
continued to decrease. Meanwhile, prices of core goods  excluding durable 
goods , which  witness the effects of the exchange rate with a further lag , 
remained on the rise. Accordingly, the exchange rate -driven inflationary 
pressures on the core goods group continued to subside. In fact, June’s 
seasonally adjusted data suggest  a notable improv ement in the underlying 
core goods inflation.  
    Factors Affecting Inflation  
5. Data for the second quarter of 2014 point to  a moderate increase in economic 
activity. On the production side, the industrial production index declined by 1 
percent in May after the 0.9 percent increase in April. The drop in May’s 
production was largely due to the sharp month -on-month fall in the production 
of capital goods. In May, the prod uction of durable goods decreased slightly, 
whereas the production of nondurable goods rose, and the production of 
intermediate goods was flat. Thus, production remained unchanged during 
April-May. The upcoming period is expected to witness an ongoing mode st 
rise in production with the support of exports and a rebound in domestic 
demand.  
6. Among the indicators of nondurable consumption demand, the production of 
nondurable goods increased quarter -on-quarter during April -May, whereas the 
imports of nondurable goods were down quarter -on-quarter. The production 
and imports of durable goods were up quarterly during April -May. Among 
indicators of durable goods demand, sales of automobiles were flat in the 
second quarter following the first -quarter plunge, while sales of home 
appliances registered an increase during April -May after a two -quarter 
slowdown . Thus, it is considered that the uptrend in the demand for 
nondurable goods continued in the second quarter and that the fall in the 
demand for durable goods may have halted. Indicators for machinery -
equipment suggest that investments remain weak . Indicators for construction 
investments show that the  increase in  construction investments continued at a 
decelerating pace in the second quarter.  
7. With the decrease in uncertainty, the improved confidence indices and the 
declining volatility in the Turkish l ira, consumption demand is expected to help 
domestic demand recover in the second half of 2014. This recovery is 
projected to be gradual and mild due to the tight monetary stance and 
macroprudential measures.  
8. Exports continued to expand in the second quar ter amid recovering external 
demand and contributed favorably to growth. Having increased slightly month -
on-month in May, the non -gold export volume index surpassed the average of 
the previous quarter during April -May. Due to the modest global recovery 
signaled  by recent survey indicators and the improv ing world trade, exports 
are envisaged to support growth further in the upcoming period.  Yet, the 
geopolitical tensions in Iraq may pose downside risks on economic activity and 
the current account balance.  9. The ongoing upsurge in employment since November 2013 lost pace during  
March -April and seasonally adjusted unemployment rates followed a flat 
course.  Construction employment fell in this period, while industrial 
employment remained unchanged and non -farm employment rose on the back 
of the services sector. L eading indicators for the second quarter point to a mild 
increase in employment.  
    Monetary Policy and Risks  
10. The Committee assessed the medium -term forecasts to be included in the July 
Inflation Report . In the second quarter of 2014, t he inflation excluding food 
was consistent with the April forecasts. Yet, the continued upsurge in food 
prices due to negative supply -side developments caused annual consumer 
inflation to remain above the forecast. The Com mittee stated that no major 
update was made to the assumptions underlying inflation forecasts and 
external conditions. Under the assumption that the upside risks to food prices 
are contained, the end -2014 inflation forecast of the April Inflation Report wa s 
left unchanged.  
11. Due to tight monetary policy stance and the macroprudential measures, loan 
growth rates rem ain at reasonable levels. In  the first half of the year, consumer 
loan growth fell well below its average of recent years, while commercial loan 
growth was relatively more robust. The Committee concluded that this 
favorable growth composition of loans both contribute to the disinflation and 
supported the rebalancing by curbing private final demand.  
12. In line with these developments, domestic privat e final demand displays a 
modest  outlook. Meanwhile, with the help of the recovery in foreign demand, 
exports contribute positively to economic growth. The Committee expects that 
such a demand composition will support disinflation and will lead to a 
significant improvement in the current  account balance in 2014. Recent 
geopolitical developments, on the other hand, may pose downside risks to 
growth and balancing process directly due to the trade channel as well as the 
oil price channel. In addition, rise in oil prices may bear adverse effe cts on 
inflation.  
13. The adverse impact of exchange rate developments since mid -2013 on annual 
inflation is gradually tapering off.  Indeed, the underlying trend of core inflation 
indicators has recently displayed a decline amid the alleviation of inflationary 
pressures led by the exchange rate particularly on durable goods. However , 
the high course  of food prices  due to supply -side de velopments in recent times 
limited the pace of decline in inflation.  The committee stated that given the falling prices in international  agricultural products in the second quarter, an 
active foreign trade policy for these products might curb upside risks to food 
prices.  
14. Recently, the Fed has stated that accommodative policies would be 
maintained for a long time and lowered the long -term interest rate 
expectations, which had a positive effect on the markets. In addition, the ECB 
reduced the policy rates and  announced a new quantitative easing program, 
boosting the global risk appetite. These developments led to expansionary 
effects on  global liquidity conditions, and capital inflows towards emerging 
economies saw a recovery. The Committee decided to deliver a measured cut 
in the one -week repo rate amid the fall in underlying inflation trend excluding 
food and improvement in global liquidity conditions. Inflation expectations, 
pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation will be closely monitored 
and the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained, by keeping a flat yield 
curve, until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.  
15. Emerging economies, including Turkey, saw an increase in portfolio inflows in 
recent months, reversing  the outflows occurrin g since mid -2013. The mild  
global growth outlook and the favorable conditions for risk appetite are 
expected to further support capital flows to emerging economies in the 
upcoming period. Accordingly, should capital inflows accelerate ; steps may be 
taken to strengthen  foreign exchange reserves. Committee was also informed 
about the need for a technical change in the exchange rate composition of the 
Reserve Option Mechanism.  
16. The Committee closely monitors developments on fiscal policy a nd tax 
adjustments with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline 
monetary stance is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will 
be maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes on administered prices 
in the forth coming period. A revision of the monetary policy stance may be 
considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this framework, 
and consequently, have an adverse effect on the medium -term inflation 
outlook.  
17. Strengthening structural reforms that will ensure the sustainability of the fiscal 
discipline and reduce the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability 
in the medium term. Steps taken in this regard will also provide more room for 
maneuvering the monetary policy and improving so cial welfare by keeping 
interest rates of long -term government securities at low levels. In this respect, 
implementing the structural reforms required by the M edium Term Program  
remains to be of utmost importance.  