No: 2014 – 10

Release Date: 18 February 2014

DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
Meeting Date: February 18, 2014
Participating Committee Members
Erdem Başçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin,
Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu.

The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to keep the short term
interest rates constant at the following levels:
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate at 12 percent, the interest rate on
borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via repo transactions at 11.5 percent,
and borrowing rate at 8 percent,
b) One-week repo rate at 10 percent,
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing
rate at 0 percent, lending rate at 15 percent.
The Committee closely monitors recent deterioration in the inflation outlook and
expectations. Inflation is likely to hover above the 5 percent target for some time due to recent
tax adjustments, exchange rate developments, and elevated food prices. In order to contain the
deterioration in inflation expectations and pricing behavior, the Committee implemented a strong
and frontloaded monetary tightening at the interim meeting of January 28, 2014. Tight monetary
policy stance will be maintained until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
There is a gradual slowdown in loan growth stemming from the tight monetary policy
stance, the recent macroprudential measures, and weak capital flows. The data regarding the
first quarter of 2014 indicate some deceleration in private final domestic demand. Meanwhile,
with the help of the recovery in foreign demand, contribution of net exports to economic growth
is expected to increase. Accordingly, the Committee expects a significant improvement in the
current account deficit in 2014.
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to
revise its stance.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five
working days.

