Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara  
0312 507 50 00  
www.tcmb.gov.tr    
 
No: 2014 -60 
PRESS RELEASE  
1 October  2014  
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING  
Meeting Date: 25 September 2014       
Inflation Developments  
1. In August, consumer prices were up 0.09 percent and annual inflation 
increased by 0.22 points to 9.54 percent. This increase in annual inflation was driven 
primarily by prices of foo d and services groups. The contribution of food and catering 
services groups to annual inflation reached 4.4 percentage points in this period. The 
underlying trend of services inflation increased, whereas the improving trend in core 
goods became evident on  the back of the fading cumulative effects of the 
depreciation in the Turkish lira.  
2. Annual food inflation edged up to 14.44 percent. In August, annual inflation 
increased to 16.06 percent in unprocessed food and reached 13.15 percent in 
processed food. This increase has been determined by both supply -side constraints 
due to adverse weather conditions and the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish 
lira. Given this outlook, the group’s inflation bears the risk to remain elevated for a 
while.  
3. Prices of s ervices rose by 0.92 percent month -on-month, bringing annual 
services inflation up to 8.96 percent. In this period, annual inflation followed a rising 
trend across most subcategories of services. In tandem with food inflation, annual 
inflation in restauran ts and hotels remained on the rise and reached 14.73 percent. 
Thus, having hovered around 8 percent since the start of 2014, services inflation rose 
approximately by 1 percentage points within the year. The underlying trend of 
services inflation continued with increasing figures, curbing the improvement in core 
indices.  
Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara  
0312 507 50 00  
www.tcmb.gov.tr  4. Receding to 2.94 percent, the annual increase in energy prices contributed 
favorably to consumer inflation. However, the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish 
lira poses an upside risk t o energy group inflation. Meanwhile, declining international 
energy prices in line with weakening global demand are thought to limit the upside 
risks.  
5. Annual core goods inflation fell to 10.37 percent in August. Due to varying lags 
in the exchange rate pass -through among subcategories, annual inflation figures 
continued to decouple in sub -groups. Accordingly, annual inflation remained on the 
decline in durable goods, the prices of which have decreased since May, in contrast 
to the persisting rise in core  goods excluding durables and clothing, which are 
affected by the exchange rate developments with a lag. Supported also by the higher -
than -expected discount in clothing prices compared to recent years’ averages, the 
seasonally adjusted data revealed a sust ained improvement in the underlying trend 
in core goods inflation.  
6. In sum, adverse effects of the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira since 
mid-2013 are gradually waning. However, the Committee assessed that elevated food 
prices continue to dela y the improvement in the inflation outlook.  
Factors Affecting Inflation  
7. Second -quarter GDP data point to sluggish economic activity compared to the 
outlook announced in the July Inflation Report. In this period, the increasing 
sentiment of unce rtainty due to international developments and the slowing global 
growth led to a weaker -than -expected performance for consumer demand and 
exports, respectively. On the other hand, net exports continued to make positive 
contribution to annual growth.  
8. Third-quarter data show a moderate quarterly increase in economic activity. 
On the production side, the Industrial Production Index grew by 1.8 percent in July, 
both month -on-month and quarter -on-quarter. However, due to shifting holidays and 
the automotive i ndustry’s holiday scheme, production may experience some volatility 
in August and September, resulting in a more modest quarterly production growth.   
9. Data on the expenditure side point to a moderate recovery in domestic private 
demand in the third quar ter. In July, the production of consumer goods was higher 
than the second -quarter average. Among indicators for the durable -goods demand, 
imports of durable goods declined, whereas the July -August average for the 
production of durable goods and the sales o f automobiles and home appliances Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara  
0312 507 50 00  
www.tcmb.gov.tr  reveals a quarterly growth. The production and imports of investment goods 
excluding transport, an indicator for machinery -equipment investments, picked up. 
Among indicators for construction investments, the production of minerals decreased 
while their imports continued to rise. Meanwhile, data on July -August budget 
spending indicate that public demand might support growth in the third quarter.  
10. Exports remain supportive of balanced growth in spite of weakening global 
demand. The non -gold export and import indices were up by a monthly 4.2 and 3.3 
percent, respectively, in July. Indicators for August point to a fall in non -gold exports 
month -on-month due to geopolitical tensions and the automotive industry, and to a 
rise in non -gold imports. Geopolitical tensions and the waning global demand, 
particularly across Europe, are expected to put further pressure on external demand 
for some time. Thus, exports may provide less support to growth in the upcoming 
period than in the first half of the year.  
11. In June, unemployment rates were higher quarter -on-quarter in seasonally 
adjusted terms. The rise in unemployment was largely due to a weaker non -farm 
employment. While labor force continued to grow, non -farm employment decline d 
slightly during May -June because of losses in construction and industrial 
employment. On the other hand, services employment remains on the rise. Leading 
indicators for the third quarter point to a stagnant outlook for employment. The low 
levels of inves tment tendency and the moderate growth in industrial production 
suggest that a recovery in the labor market may take some time.  
12. In sum, private demand is expected to recover modestly and gradually on the 
back of less tight financial conditions and wani ng domestic uncertainties. However, 
the weakening global demand, the uncertainty over global monetary policies and the 
lack of a strong and steady recovery in consumer and investor confidence add to the 
downside risks to growth.  
Monetary Policy and Ri sks 
13. The Committee stated that the recent growth rate and the composition of 
loans evolve in the desired direction, owing to the tight monetary policy stance and 
macroprudential measures. The annual growth rate of consumer loans remain at low 
levels, wh ile commercial loan growth is relatively more robust. The current outlook in 
loans not only contains medium -term inflation pressures but also supports the 
improvement in the current account balance.  Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara  
0312 507 50 00  
www.tcmb.gov.tr  14. In line with these developments, the private sector demand is expected to 
follow a mild and gradual growth path after the slowdown in the second quarter. 
Exports, on the other hand, continue to support balanced growth in spite of the 
weakening global demand. Accordingly, it is believed that demand developme nts will 
not pose an upward pressure on inflation in the coming period, while supply -side 
factors will affect the course of inflation.  
15. Macroprudential measures taken at the beginning of the year and the tight 
monetary policy stance started to have favo rable impact on the core inflation trend. 
Having soared in early 2014, trend of core inflation indicators H and I have recently 
improved and most of the rise in inflation trend was taken back by August. 
Accordingly, the adverse impact of cumulative exchang e rate developments on 
annual inflation is tapering off as well. The Committee highlighted that there is a 
considerable room for decline in inflation in 2015 through this channel. However, it 
was also underlined that second round effects and the recent vol atility in exchange 
rates should be closely monitored.  
16. Elevated food prices continue to delay the improvement in the inflation 
outlook. The Committee noted that domestic food prices have diverged negatively 
from international food prices in recent mont hs. It is also suggested that the fall in 
commodity prices, driven by slowing global demand, might contain upside risks to 
inflation. The current elevated levels of inflation affect medium -term expectations 
adversely and boost risks related to pricing beha vior. The Committee will closely 
monitor inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation 
and maintain the tight monetary policy stance by keeping a flat yield curve until there 
is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.  
17. Uncertainty regarding global monetary policies has continued to prevail in 
financial markets recently. While ending quantitative easing, the U.S. Federal Reserve 
stated that it would keep policy rates low for a considerable time. Moreover, the  
expectations of the level that policy rates will reach in the long run is lower than the 
pre-crisis level. In this context, the Committee was briefed on limits, interest rates 
and past implementations of Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets -Foreign 
Exch ange Deposit Market. The European Central Bank has recently cut policy rates 
against the risks of economic slowdown and deflation and announced a quantitative 
easing program. Although such policies may lead to more capital flows into emerging 
markets, the volatility in capital flows persists.  
18. For the purposes of financial stability, it is important to further strengthen the 
current healthy state of the banking sector. In this context, the Committee was Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara  
0312 507 50 00  
www.tcmb.gov.tr  informed about the preparations on remunerating the Turkish lira portion of required 
rese rves, on a basis to encourage improving the deposit and equity ratios of the 
banking sector.  
19. The Committee closely monitors developments on the fiscal policy and tax 
adjustments with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline 
moneta ry stance is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be 
maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes on administered prices in the 
forthcoming period. A revision of the monetary policy stance may be considered, 
should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this framework, and consequently, 
have an adverse effect on the medium -term inflation outlook.  
20. Strengthening structural reforms that will ensure the sustainability of the fiscal 
discipline and reduce the savings defic it will support macroeconomic stability in the 
medium term. Steps taken in this regard will also provide more room for 
maneuvering the monetary policy and improving social welfare by keeping interest 
rates of long -term government securities at low levels. In this respect, implementing 
the structural reforms required by the Medium Term Program remains to be of 
utmost importance.  
 