Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası 
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey) 
Head Office 
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara 
0312 507 50 00 
www.tcmb.gov.tr   
 
No: 2014-59  
PRESS RELEASE  
1 October 2014 
The Sixth Meeting of the Financial Stability Board Regional 
Consultative Group for the Middle East and North Af rica  
Today, the Central Bank of Jordan hosted the sixth meeting of the FSB Regional 
Consultative Group for the Middle East and North Af rica (RCG-MENA) in Dead Sea, 
Jordan.  
At the meeting, the members of the RCG-MENA were up dated on the FSB’s work plan 
and the progress made in the four core areas of fin ancial regulatory reforms: building 
resilient financial institutions, “ending too-big-t o-fail”, transforming shadow banking, 
and making derivatives markets safer. In regard to the “ending too-big-to-fail”, 
members discussed recovery and resolution of financ ial market infrastructures with 
particular reference to implementation challenges f or the MENA region. The 
discussion also focused, from the MENA region persp ective, on the issues in cross-
border cooperation and information sharing for reso lution purposes.  
Members discussed salient global macro-economic and  macro-financial 
developments and their potential financial stabilit y implications for the MENA region 
in the context of vulnerabilities in the global fin ancial system and regional financial 
stability. Members also exchanged views on and shar ed experiences in reducing 
mechanistic reliance on the ratings of the credit r ating agencies, and the plans for 
reducing such reliance. The role of supervisory cap acity building for enhancing risk 
governance practices in financial institutions in t he region was yet another theme of 
discussion. Members also deliberated on the impact of regulatory reforms on the 
long-term investments, with a focus on encouraging non-bank, market-based 
alternative financing mechanisms for promoting long -term investments.   
The RCG-MENA co-chairs Erdem Başçı, Governor, Centr al Bank of the Republic of 
Turkey and Riad Salame, Governor, Central Bank of L ebanon will report on these 
discussions at the upcoming FSB Plenary meeting. Th e current membership of the 
Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası 
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey) 
Head Office 
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara 
0312 507 50 00 
www.tcmb.gov.tr RCG-MENA includes financial and regulatory authorit ies from Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, 
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saud i Arabia, Tunisia, Turkey and 
the United Arab Emirates. The list of members of th e RCG-MENA is accessible at: 
http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/about/rcgmen a.pdf .  
 
Notes to editors 
The FSB Charter stipulates that the FSB “should consult widely amongst its Members 
and with other stakeholders including private sector an d non-member authorities. 
This process shall include engaging with the FSB Reg ional Consultative Groups and 
include an outreach to countries not included in the Regional Consultative Groups” 1.   
At the Toronto Summit in June 2010, the G20 Leaders  endorsed such a process by 
calling on the FSB “to expand upon and formalize its outreach activities  beyond the 
membership of the G-20 to reflect the global nature of  our financial system” 2. 
Responding to the call, the FSB established, in 201 1, six Regional Consultative 
Groups 3 to bring together financial authorities from FSB m ember and non-member 
countries to exchange views on vulnerabilities affe cting financial systems and on 
initiatives to promote financial stability. 
The FSB has been established to coordinate at the i nternational level the work of 
national financial authorities and international st andard setting bodies and to 
develop and promote the implementation of effective  regulatory, supervisory and 
other financial sector policies in the interest of financial stability. It brings together 
national authorities responsible for financial stab ility in 24 countries and jurisdictions, 
international financial institutions, sector-specif ic international groupings of 
regulators and supervisors, and committees of centr al bank experts. Through the six 
regional groups, the FSB will be able to develop gl obal financial policy initiatives 
through a more inclusive process. 
The FSB is chaired by Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England. Its Secretariat is 
located in Basel, Switzerland, and hosted by the Ba nk for International Settlements. 
For further information on the FSB, visit the FSB w ebsite, 
www.financialstabilityboard.org . 
 
 
 Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası 
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey) 
Head Office 
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara 
0312 507 50 00 
www.tcmb.gov.tr Contact:  
For further information, please contact Press Secre tary Yücel Yazar 
Tel No: +90 312 507 5656 
 
                                                           
ENDNOTES 
1 http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications /r_120809.pdf  
2 https://www.g20.org/sites/default/files/g20_resourc es/library/Toronto_Declaration_eng.pdf  
3 The FSB regional consultative groups cover the fol lowing regions: Americas, Asia, Commonwealth of 
Independent States, Europe, Middle East and North A frica, and Sub-Saharan Africa.  