No : 2014 – 17     Release Date: 20 March  2014 
 
PRESS RELEASE ON THE FIFTH MEETING OF THE FINANCIAL 
STABILITY BOARD REGIONAL CONSULTATIVE GROUP FOR THE 
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA  
 
Today, the Bank Al-Maghrib (BAM), the central bank o f Morocco, 
hosted the fifth meeting of the FSB Regional Consult ative Group for the 
Middle East and North Africa (RCG-MENA) in Rabat.  
Members of the RCG-MENA were updated on the FSB’s po licy 
priorities and work plan for financial regulatory r eforms, which include 
building resilient financial institutions, ending t he problem of too-big-to-fail, 
transforming shadow banking into a transparent and robust segment of the 
financial system, and making derivatives markets sa fer. Members 
discussed vulnerabilities in the global financial s ystem and regional financial 
stability issues, including the potential implicati ons for the region of the 
normalization of monetary policy in the advanced ec onomies and the 
changes in bank-funding patterns. They took stock of  the impact in the 
MENA region of the G-SIFI framework as well as the D -SIB frameworks, 
which aim at enhancing systemic resilience, and sha red implementation 
challenges in adopting them in their respective jur isdictions. Members also 
discussed the progress made in creating more effect ive resolution regimes, 
which seek to address the problem of too-big-to-fai l, in the region and 
shared country experiences. In the context of syste mic risk regulation, 
members shared their experiences with respect to th e measures for 
strengthening oversight and regulation of shadow ba nking, and the role and 
soundness of deposit insurance systems in the regio n. Members also 
deliberated on the current status and prospects for  development of Islamic 
finance in the region.  The RCG-MENA is co-chaired by Erdem Ba şçı, Governor, Central 
Bank of the Republic of Turkey and Riad Salame, Gove rnor, Central Bank 
of Lebanon. The current membership of the RCG-MENA i ncludes financial 
and regulatory authorities from Algeria, Bahrain, E gypt, Jordan, Kuwait, 
Lebanon, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia , Turkey and the 
United Arab Emirates. The list of members of the RCG -MENA is accessible 
at: http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/about/rcgmen a.pdf  
 
Notes to editors: 
The FSB Charter stipulates that the FSB “should consul t widely 
amongst its Members and with other stakeholders inc luding private sector 
and non-member authorities. This process shall incl ude engaging with the 
FSB Regional Consultative Groups and include an outr each to countries not 
included in the Regional Consultative Groups” 1.  
At the Toronto Summit in June 2010, the G20 Leaders  endorsed such 
a process by calling on the FSB “to expand upon and formalize its outreach 
activities beyond the membership of the G-20 to ref lect the global nature of 
our financial system” 2. Responding to the call, in 2011, six regional 
consultative groups 3 of the FSB were established, to bring together fina ncial 
authorities from FSB member and non-member countries  to exchange 
views on vulnerabilities affecting financial system s and on initiatives to 
promote financial stability. 
The FSB has been established to coordinate at the int ernational level 
the work of national financial authorities and inte rnational standard setting 
bodies and to develop and promote the implementatio n of effective 
regulatory, supervisory and other financial sector policies in the interest of 
financial stability. It brings together national au thorities responsible for 
                                                           
1 http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications /r_120809.pdf  
2 http://epe.lac-bac.gc.ca/100/206/301/faitc-aecic/g2 0/2013-08-14/summit-sommet/2010/toronto-
declaration-toronto1b0e.html?lang=eng  
3 The FSB regional consultative groups were establis hed for the following regions: the Americas, Asia, 
Commonwealth of Independent States, Europe, Middle East and North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa. financial stability in 24 countries and jurisdictio ns, international financial 
institutions, sector-specific international groupin gs of regulators and 
supervisors, and committees of central bank experts . Through the six 
regional groups, the FSB will be able to develop glo bal financial policy 
initiatives through a more inclusive process. 
The FSB is chaired by Mark Carney, Governor of the Ba nk of 
England. Its Secretariat is located in Basel, Switz erland, and hosted by the 
Bank for International Settlements. 
For further information on the FSB, visit the FSB webs ite, 
www.financialstabilityboard.org. 