Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara  
0312 507 50 00  
www.tcmb.gov.tr    
 
No: 2014 -67 
PRESS RELEASE  
31 October 2014  
Summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting  
Meeting Date: 23 October 2014  
Inflation Developments  
1. In September, consumer prices increased by 0.14 percent and annual inflation 
declined to 8.86 percent. The fall in annual inflation was mainly attributed to the 
positive outlook on core goods and energy while the contribution of food to annual 
inflation  remained high. For the underlying inflation trend, the improvement in the 
core goods continues to some extent whereas the services category remains on the 
rise.  
2. Annual food inflation fell to 13.95 percent. In September, annual inflation 
dropped in both  unprocessed and processed food but remained elevated due to 
adverse weather conditions and the cumulative effects of exchange rates. However, 
indicators for October point to some decline in annual unprocessed food inflation.  
3. Falling to 1.38 percent in September, annual energy inflation contribute 
favorably to consumer inflation. Having decreased due to the weakening global 
demand, international oil prices are expected to continue to support this outlook. 
Yet, the October adjustments on natural gas and e lectricity tariffs are likely to drive 
energy prices significantly higher. These hikes are forecasted to add about 0.4 
percentage points to annual consumer inflation.  
4. Prices of services rose by 0.9 percent in September and annual services 
inflation rem ained constant around 8.96 percent. In this period, restaurants and 
hotels inflation maintained its high level with 14.43 percent, while transport and rent 
inflation maintained their upward trend that has been accelerating in recent months. 
Annual core goo ds inflation dropped to 9.42 percent in this period. Annual inflation 
continued to fall in durable goods but rose further, albeit more slowly, in core goods 
Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara  
0312 507 50 00  
www.tcmb.gov.tr  excluding durables and clothing, which are affected by the exchange rate 
developments with a furthe r lag. In line with the outlook on prices of services and 
core goods, underlying core inflation indicators continued to improve.   
5. In sum, elevated food prices delay the improvement in the inflation outlook, 
yet falling commodity, especially oil, prices , are expected to support disinflation 
foreseen for the next year.  
Factors Affecting Inflation  
6. Data for the third -quarter of 2014 show a moderate quarter -on-quarter 
increase in economic activity. On the production side, the industrial production index 
decreased by 1.4 percent in August after growing by 1.9 percent in July. Thus, during 
July-August, production rose by 1.1 percent quarter -on-quarter. With the support of 
exports, this outlook is expected to be preserved in September as well.  
7. Data on the  expenditure side point to a moderate recovery in domestic private 
demand for the third quarter after the first -half decline. During July -August, the 
production of durable and nondurable consumer goods and imports of total 
consumer goods recorded increases . Similarly, the sales of automobiles and home 
appliances have picked up on the back of more favorable financial conditions. Among 
indicators for machinery -equipment investments, the production of investment 
goods excluding transport rose during July -Augus t while their imports decreased. 
Meanwhile, the production of minerals, an indicator for construction investments, 
declined whereas their imports continued to rise. Given the fall in construction 
employment, it is assessed that private construction investm ents have slowed in the 
third quarter. Thus, private consumer spending is expected to rebound quarter -on-
quarter whereas private investment demand may continue its weak course in the 
third quarter. On the other hand, data on third -quarter budget spending i ndicate that 
public demand might support growth in the third quarter.  
8. In August, the non -gold import index nearly flattened out month -on-month 
while the non -gold export index was down by 7.9 percent due to geopolitical tensions 
and the automotive indust ry’s August holiday scheme. Indicators for September point 
to a monthly fall in non -gold imports and to a rise in non -gold exports due to 
increased exports to Iraq and the pickup in the automotive industry compensating for 
the August decline. Hence, non -gold imports may post a slight quarterly increase in 
the third quarter of the year, whereas non -gold exports will remain flat. Moreover, it 
is assessed that weak global demand and geopolitical risks might continue to limit the 
contribution of net exports to growth in the final quarter.  Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara  
0312 507 50 00  
www.tcmb.gov.tr  9. In July, total and nonfarm unemployment rates were higher than in the 
previous period in seasonally adjusted terms. The rise in unemployment was largely 
due to weak outlook in non -farm employment. Yet the increase in labor f orce 
participation is marked. In this period, the downtrend in construction employment 
halted, while losses in industrial employment persisted. Meanwhile, services 
employment continued to support nonfarm employment. Leading indicators for the 
third quarter  fail to signal a positive outlook for nonfarm employment. The low levels 
of investment tendency and the moderate growth in industrial production suggest 
that a recovery in the labor market may take some time.  
10. To sum up, third -quarter data indicate tha t private domestic demand 
recovered modestly. As suggested by surveys, the moderate recovery of domestic 
demand may continue into the final quarter. However, a possible slowdown across 
European economies and geopolitical tensions may cause external demand to 
weaken. Therefore, economic activity is expected to grow moderately and gradually 
in the second half of the year. On the other hand, uncertainty over global monetary 
policies, the recent increase of volatility in financial markets and the weak consumer 
and investor confidence pose downside risks on growth. Thus, demand conditions are 
expected to limit the upside pressures on inflation while domestic demand 
developments will support the improvement in current account balance.  
Monetary Policy and Risks  
11. The Committee assessed the medium -term forecasts projected to be included 
in the October Inflation Report. Due to the negative supply -side developments, food 
prices remained elevated in the third quarter of 2014, which led the annual consumer 
inflation to  exceed the forecasts presented in July Inflation Report. Upon the 
evaluation of assumptions underlying inflation forecasts and external conditions, 
given the developments in import and oil prices, food prices, energy price 
adjustments, output gap and the underlying inflation trend, year -end inflation 
forecasts for 2014 and 2015 were revised upwards.  
12. Global financial markets have recently followed a volatile course. While, the 
Fed terminated its quantitative easing program, the timing and magnitude of the 
policy rate increase remained uncertain. The ECB reduced policy rates against the 
risks of economic slowdown and deflation and announced a new quantitative easing 
program through the purchase of covered bonds and asset -backed securities. 
Persisting unc ertainties regarding global monetary policies and the downturn in 
global economic activity may lead to volatility in capital inflows towards emerging 
economies as well as their risk indicators. The Committee stated that the reduction in Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara  
0312 507 50 00  
www.tcmb.gov.tr  interest rates on t he foreign exchange deposits that banks can borrow from the CBRT 
within their borrowing limits in the Foreign Exchange Deposit Market would support 
balanced growth and continuity of capital inflows towards Turkey during the 
normalization of global monetary  policies. In addition, it is important to further 
strengthen the current healthy structure of the banking sector. Accordingly, the 
Committee stated that introducing an additional support to the core liabilities of 
financial institutions through remunerati on of required reserves which are held in 
Turkish lira would spur balanced growth and domestic savings.  
13. Elevated food prices delay the improvement in the inflation outlook. 
Unfavorable developments in food prices were mainly driven by supply conditions . 
Should supply conditions make no additional negative contribution in 2015, and food 
inflation near its averages of past years, there will be a considerable room for decline 
in inflation through this channel. Due to the recently -weakening global demand, 
falling commodity prices, oil in particular, are expected to support the disinflation 
process projected for 2015. In contrast to these positive developments in the 
inflation outlook, the current elevated levels of inflation affect the medium -term 
expectatio ns adversely and boost risks related to pricing behavior. The Committee 
will closely monitor inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors that 
affect inflation, and maintain a tight monetary policy stance by keeping a flat yield 
curve until t here is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.  
14. Growth rates and composition of loans evolve in the desired direction, owing 
to the tight monetary policy stance and macroprudential measures. Consumer loan 
growth followed a weak course, whil e commercial loan growth was relatively more 
robust.  This favorable outlook of loans both contributes to disinflation and support 
rebalancing of the current account. Additional tightening measures will be taken 
should credit growth accelerate in a way tha t poses upside risks to inflation and 
aggravates financial risks by distorting the rebalancing process.  
15. Recently -released data point to a deceleration in economic activity. An overall 
slowdown in growth in the global economy has been observed in the se cond and 
third quarters of 2014. Languishing external demand due to halting growth in the 
European countries, the largest export market of Turkey, besides geopolitical 
developments in neighboring countries limit the growth of exports. Falling 
commodity pri ces due to the weak global demand are expected to restrict growth in 
imports and improve the current account balance. Meanwhile, on account of the 
lingering volatility in financial markets and the sluggish course of confidence indices, 
private sector final  demand does not exhibit a steady recovery. Therefore, it is 
expected that the projected recovery in economic activity will be gradual and Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara  
0312 507 50 00  
www.tcmb.gov.tr  aggregate demand developments will support the disinflation process. In the case of 
an additional slowdown in externa l demand and a sizeable decline in global growth 
rates, the decrease in commodity prices will pull inflation down. Nevertheless, 
domestic economic activity may witness notable adverse effects at the same time. 
Under such circumstances, the Committee will e mploy policy tools to support the 
economy.  
16. Macroprudential measures taken at the beginning of the year coupled with the 
tight monetary stance have a favorable effect on the core inflation trend. Having 
significantly increased in early 2014, trend of co re inflation indicators H and I have 
recently improved and most of the rise in inflation trend was taken back by the third 
quarter. Accordingly, the adverse impact of exchange rate developments on annual 
inflation is tapering off. This channel is assessed to provide inflation with a 
considerable room for decline in 2015. However, second -round effects and inflation 
expectations need to be closely monitored. In the event that additional 
deteriorations occur in the medium -term inflation outlook, liquidity and monetary 
policies would be tightened.  
17. The Committee closely monitors developments on the fiscal policy and tax 
adjustments with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline 
monetary stance is formulated under the assumption that fisca l discipline will be 
maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes on administered prices in the 
forthcoming period. A revision of the monetary policy stance may be considered, 
should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this framework, and c onsequently, 
have an adverse effect on the medium -term inflation outlook.  
18. Strengthening structural reforms that will ensure the sustainability of the fiscal 
discipline and reduce the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability in the 
medium te rm. Steps taken in this regard will also provide more room for 
maneuvering the monetary policy and improving social welfare by keeping interest 
rates of long -term government securities at low levels. In this respect, implementing 
the structural reforms req uired by the Medium Term Program remains to be of 
utmost importance.  
 