No: 2014 - 11 
Release Date: 25 February 2014 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 18 February 2014  
       Inflation Developments 
1. In January, consumer prices incr eased by 1.98 percent, and annual inflation 
reached 7.75 percent. Food prices, tax adjustments and exchange rate 
movements were influential in this rise and core inflation indicators recorded 
an increase due to core goods. Meanwhile, services inflation maintained its 
relatively mild course. 
 
2. Annual food group infl ation climbed to 10.89 percent. In January, not only 
fresh fruits and vegetables but  also other products registered price hikes. This 
resulted in increased annual unprocessed f ood inflation despite the high base 
from the previous year. Meanwhile, upon price increases that spread across 
the group, processed food prices were  up by 1.42 percent and the group’s 
annual inflation reached 8 percent.  
3. In January, despite the fall in internat ional oil prices, energy  prices increased 
owing to the rise in domestic fuel pric es amid the depreciation of the Turkish 
lira. Meanwhile, in the alcoholic bev erages and tobacco products group, SCT 
adjustments introduced pushed the tobacco products’ prices up by 7.4 percent. 
 
4. Prices of services edged up by 0.93 percent, and the group’s annual inflation 
maintained its level around 8 percent. Seasonally adjusted data pointed to a 
limited rise in the underlying trend of se rvices inflation in this period. 
Meanwhile, annual core goods inflati on increased by about 1 percentage 
points to 7.12 percent. This was mainly dr iven by the surging prices of durable 
goods on the reverberations of the depreciation in the Turkish lira besides the raised SCT on automobiles. On the other hand, annual inflation in the clothing 
group remained on a downward trend. Core  goods prices accelerated as the 
depreciation in the Turkish lira that star ted in mid-December has reflected on 
prices since January. 5. In sum, The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) closely monitors the 
recent deterioration in the inflation out look and expectations. Inflation is likely 
to hover above the 5-percent target fo r some time due to the recent tax 
adjustments, exchange rate developments and the unfavorable co urse of food 
prices. 
 
     Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. Recent data suggest that final domestic demand continued to increase 
moderately in the fourth quarter. Following the recent  sharp fluctuations, the 
industrial production index remained steady at its November level in 
December. Yet, in quarterly terms, industrial production posted a modest 
quarter-on-quarter increase in the fourth qua rter, which is close to the average 
growth rate seen since early 2012. 
7. The moderate trend in private consum ption demand conti nued in the last 
quarter of the year. Production and impor ts of consumer goods were up 
quarter-on-quarter compared to the previous  quarter. Despite hovering slightly 
below the averages of the previous quarter, sales of automobiles and white 
goods remained elevated throughout t he fourth quarter. Meanwhile, 
investment demand was more favorable in  the fourth quarter. Production of 
capital goods grew moderately quarter-o n-quarter in the final quarter. The 
production of capital goods excluding ve hicles, an indicator for the underlying 
trend, recorded a larger growth than total capital goods. Sim ilarly, imports of 
capital goods increased as well. 
8. Data suggest that exports maintained their modest growth trend in the fourth 
quarter. In fact, the non-gold export volu me index was up in the fourth quarter 
from the third-quarter av erage. The global recovery and the robust 
international import demand that PMI indica tors point to have been effective in 
this increase. 
9. The increased domestic uncertainty  has caused consumer confidence to 
slump recently. Meanwhile, automobile sales also slowed dramatically in 
January. Moreover, loans, particularl y consumer loans, have been posting a 
gradually slower rate of growth. On t he other hand, despite some weakening, 
the investment and employ ment sentiment in January’s Business Tendency 
Survey (BTS) maintained their moderate levels, while the PMI new order and 
production indices have no negative out look. Against this background, the 
Committee envisages that private domes tic final demand may decelerate in 
the first quarter of 2014. 10. Seasonally adjusted unemployment rates remained unchanged in November 
2013. The rise in employment in this period came largely from the services 
sector, while construction employment  increased after a flat performance 
throughout 2013 and industrial employment remained relatively weak. Leading 
indicators show no signs of additional worsening for employment and point to 
a moderate employment growth. In vi ew of the expected slowdown in 
domestic demand, unemployment appears to be on a slightly upward trend for 
2014. A smaller-than-expected global economic recovery and domestic 
uncertainties may remain constraint to investment and empl oyment growth for 
the upcoming period. 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
11. The Committee noted that credit grow th has been slowing gradually due to 
tight monetary policy, macroprudential measures and weak capital flows. 
Particularly due to macroprudential measures , the growth of consumer loans is 
expected to slow at a relatively faster pace. Moreover, it is assessed that the 
recent uncertainty might cause private demand to weaken in the first quarter. 
Data released for the first quarter of 2014 suggest that private domestic final 
demand might decelerate. 
 
12. Recent data indicate that exports continue to grow moderately and the non-
gold current account balance maintain s its improvement trend. Thus, the 
Committee stated that the recovering ex ternal demand and the slowing private 
domestic final demand will he lp to increase the positiv e contribution from net 
exports to growth over t he year. This increase ma y also contain the negative 
effects of the decelerating domestic fi nal demand on growth. In addition, the 
slowdown in consumer loan growth could particularly support the current 
account rebalancing. Against this background, the Committee expects the 
current account balance to display a significant improvement in 2014. 
 
13. In the second half of 2013, with the high  course of food pric es and the external 
uncertainties that led the Turkish lir a to depreciate, inflation increased and 
core inflation indicators and inflation expectations deteriorated. Recent and 
lingering external uncertainties coupled with the elevated domestic 
uncertainties caused additional exchange rate movements, which weighed on 
the risk of inflation exceeding the target  for a protracted period. Moreover, the 
recent tax adjustments and the persisting unfavorable course of food prices 
also exacerbated the deteriorati on in the inflation outlook. 
 
 14. The Committee closely monitors the recent  deterioration in t he inflation outlook 
and expectations. It is envisaged that fact ors affecting inflation adversely will 
keep inflation indicators considerably above the 5-percent target for a while. 
Against this background, the Committee un derlined that it will not tolerate any 
deterioration in price stability in the medium-term. To this end, the Committee 
opted for a strong and front-loaded monetar y tightening in the interim meeting 
of 28 January 2014 to prevent deteriorat ion in the inflation expectation and the 
pricing behavior. The Committee judges that the current policy stance will be 
enough to anchor inflation expectations. The Committee indicated that tight 
monetary policy stance will be sustained until there is a significant 
improvement in the inflation outlook and that the liquidity policy may be 
tightened further if deemed necessary. 
15. The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments and tax adjustments 
closely with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline 
monetary policy stance takes the fisca l framework outlined in the Medium 
Term Program as given. Accordingly, it is assumed that fiscal discipline will be 
sustained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices. A 
revision in the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal 
stance deviate significantly from th is framework and consequently have an 
adverse effect on the medi um-term inflation outlook. 
16. Maintaining the cautious stance in fisca l and financial sector policies is critical 
to the resilience of our economy agains t current uncertainties. Strengthening 
structural reforms that will ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and 
reduce the savings deficit will support ma croeconomic stabilit y in the medium 
term. Steps taken in this regard will al so provide more room for maneuvering 
the monetary policy and improve social we lfare by keeping interest rates of 
long-term government securities permanentl y at low levels. In this respect, 
implementation of the structural re forms required by the Medium Term 
Program remains to be of utmost importance. 
 