 
   
 
No: 2014 -70 
PRESS RELEASE  
27 November  2014  
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date : 20 November  2014       
Inflation Developments  
1. In October, consumer prices increased by 1.90 percent and annual inflation edged up 
by 0.10 points to 8.96 percent. The rise in annual inflation was mainly driven by the 
energy group due to the electricity and natural gas prices, and the contribution of 
food to annual inflation remained high. The relatively favorable course of underlying 
core goods inflation continued, whereas the services category remained on the rise.  
2. Annual food inflation fell by 1.4 percentage points to 12.56 percent. This fall was 
main ly led by the unprocessed food group, particularly fresh fruits and vegetables, 
whereas annual processed food inflation increased. The seasonally -adjusted data 
pointed to a correction in September and October in unprocessed food prices, albeit 
limited, and  the group’s annual inflation remained elevated. Indicators for November 
signal for a possible increase in the annual food inflation due to fruits and vegetables.  
3. Owing to the adjustment in the electricity and natural gas tariffs, annual energy 
inflation r ose by 3 points to 4.43 percent in October. However, the declin ing oil prices 
poses a downside pressure on the group’s inflation , particularly through the fuel and 
bottled gas prices . In fact, indicators for November suggest a notable fall in the 
annual en ergy inflation and sustained favorable contribution of the group to the 
consumer inflation.  
4. Annual core goods inflation dropped by 0.5 points to 8.95 percent in October. Annual 
inflation, which has been on the decline in durable goods since May, recorded a  
decrease also in core goods excluding durables and clothing after a long time, 
indicating that the exchange rate effects have been quite alleviated. On the other 
hand, prices of services rose by 0.61 percent in October and annual services inflation 
edged up by 0.2 points to 9.17 percent. Annual inflation remained elevated in 
restaurants and hotels, and maintained the upward trend in transport services and 
rent groups.  
 
 5. The seasonally -adjusted data point to a sustained improvement  in the underlying 
trend of core inflation indicators. A noticeable improvement was witnessed in core 
goods inflation following the first quarter, while the underlying trend of services 
inflation remained high.  
Factors Affecting Inflation  
6. Data for the third -quarter of 2014 show a more benign economic outlook than in the 
second quarter. Industrial production grew by 1.7 percent in September on a 
seasonally adjusted basis. Thus, industrial production rose by 1.5 percent quarter -on-
quarter. This recovery in production is expected to continue with the support of 
domestic demand.  
7. Data on the expenditure side point to a moderate recovery in domestic private 
demand for the third quarter after the first -half decline. In this period, the 
production o f consumer goods rose on the back of durable goods, while the fall in 
the imports of consumer goods ended. The sales of automobiles and home 
appliances recovered markedly thanks to more favorable financial conditions. 
However, indicators for private invest ment demand display a weaker outlook. The 
production of capital goods picked up from the second quarter whereas imports of 
capital goods went down. An indicator for construction investments, the production 
of minerals continued to decline, albeit more mode stly, while construction 
employment remained weak. As a consequence , private construction investments  
are expected to slow slightly in the third quarter. Overall, private consumer spending 
is expected to rebound in this period whereas private investment de mand may 
remain on a more moderate path.  
8. Survey indicators for the fourth quarter suggest that the recovery may continue into 
the fourth quarter. The PMI and the B usiness Tendency Survey , both leading 
indicators for production, gave positive signals for th e fourth -quarter industrial 
production. The domestic sales of automobiles increased in October, nearing the 
level in the final quarter of 2013. As an indicator for investments, the firms’ 
expectation for fixed -capital investments has been associated with p ositive signals 
for the past two months. Yet, it is too early to declare that this development hints at 
a permanent recovery for investments in the upcoming period. Meanwhile, the weak 
consumer confidence in October added to the downside risks on consumpti on. 
9. The rise in total and nonfarm unemployment stopped in August in seasonally 
adjusted terms. After falling in previous periods, nonfarm employment rose in 
August, while labor force participation continued to increase. Constru ction and 
industrial employment began to rise again in line with the recent economic recovery. 
Meanwhile, services employment continues to grow steadily. Leading indicators for 
the final quarter signal a modest growth in nonfarm employment and a flattening in 
the unemployment rate. The low levels of investment tendency and the weak 
external demand suggest that the recovery in the labor market may take some time.   
 10. To sum up, domestic demand is expected to make more contribution to growth while 
economic activity is likely  to recov er moderate ly in the second half of the year. 
However, the uncertainty surrounding global monetary policies, the slowing yet 
continued financial volatility and the weak consumer confidence put downside 
pressure on economic activity. Against this background , demand conditions are 
expected to continue to limit the upside pressures on inflation.  
 
Monetary Policy and Risks  
11. The Committee indicated that the recent fall in market rates and risk premiums had 
an expansionary effect on financial conditions. However, the tight monetary stance 
and the macroprudential measures kept loan growth rates at reasonable levels. The 
composition of loans also continues to move in the desired direction. While the 
annual growth rate of consumer loans hovers around low levels, comme rcial loans 
remain relatively more robust. This loan outlook and the composition not only limit  
medium -term inflationary pressures but also support the improvement in the current 
account balance.  
12. Global demand remains weak, while the contribution of domes tic demand to growth 
is increasing. The second half of the year saw some recovery in private consumption 
and private machinery -equipment demand. In this period, contribution of exports to 
annual growth  rate has moderated , largely due to the global economic  slowdown. 
Despite this change in growth composition, the moderate course of consumer loans 
and the favorable changes in  the terms of trade may contribute to the improvement 
in the current account balance.  
13. The macroprudential measures adopted in early 2014 and the tight monetary stance 
continue to have a positive impact on the core inflation trend. Although elevated 
food prices delay  the improvement in inflation, underlying inflation has displayed a 
marked d ecrease in core goods during recent months. Falling commodity prices, in 
particular  declining oil prices , are expected to support the disinflation process 
foreseen  for the next year.   
14. On the other hand, the current elevated levels of services inflation and  the medium -
term expectations suggest that risks related to pricing behavior are still prevalent. 
The Committee will closely monitor inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other 
factors that affect inflation, and maintain a tight monetary policy stan ce by keeping a 
flat yield curve until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook. The 
Committee anticipates that , under the current monetary policy stance, inflation will 
decline throughout 2015 in line with the forecast presented in the Inflation Report.  
15. The meeting also involved a discussion of the importance of pruden t borrowing 
against global risks. It was stated that capital flows to emerging markets may 
continue to be volatile in 2015. The ongoing uncertainty about the normalization of 
global monetary policies cause the global risk appetite and capital flows to be data -
sensitive. The Committee emphasized that the CBRT has a rich set of policy tools to  
 use against an earlier -than -expected policy rate hike  by the Fed . Yet, Europe and 
Japan have announc ed new monetary expansion packages recently, and the 
economic slowdown might postpone the normalization of global monetary policies. 
Thus, a scenario in which global inter est rates remain low for a long time while  
uncertainties over global economy persist gains prominence. As materialization of 
such a scenario would cause a  surge  in over -borrowing, it is crucial to support  
prudential borrowing to limit the accumulation of m acrofinancial risks in the 
upcoming period. In this re spect , the staff briefed the Committee about the possible 
measures that would encourage the extension of maturit ies for non -core liabilities.  
16. Developments on the fiscal policy and tax adjustments are monitored  closely  with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook . The baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained and there 
will be no unanticipated hikes on administered prices. A rev ision of the monetary 
policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy  deviate significantly from 
this framework, and consequently, have an adverse effect on the medium -term 
inflation outlook.  
17. The Committee welcome d the development  that the new Medium Term Program  
incorporates  the fight against inflation as  one of the main objective s. Moreover, i t 
was indicated that Turkey’s growth potential would increase gradually with the 
implementation of the recently announced structural transformation program . Any 
measure to ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings 
deficit will support macroeconomic stability and contribute positively to social 
welfare by keeping interest rates of long -term government securities at low levels . 