No: 2015-13

PRESS RELEASE
24 February 2015

DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
Participating Committee Members
Erdem Başçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çetinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin,
Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu.

The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to set the short term interest rates as
follows:
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate has been reduced from 11.25 percent to 10.75
percent, the interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for primary dealers via repo
transactions has been reduced from 10.75 percent to 10.25 percent, and borrowing rate has been
reduced from 7.5 percent to 7.25 percent,
b) One-week repo rate has been reduced from 7.75 percent to 7.5 percent,
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing rate has been
kept at 0 percent, and lending rate has been reduced from 12.75 percent to 12.25 percent.
Loan growth continues at reasonable levels in response to the tight monetary policy stance and
macroprudential measures. The favorable developments in the terms of trade and the moderate course
of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance. External demand
remains weak, while domestic demand contributes to growth moderately. The Committee assesses that
the implementation of the announced structural reforms would contribute to the potential growth
significantly.
The ongoing cautious monetary policy along with prudent fiscal and macroprudential policies are having a
favorable impact on inflation, especially inflation excluding energy and food (core inflation indicators),
and inflation expectations. The Committee anticipates that the core inflation will continue to decline. Yet,
a more persistent reduction in inflation necessitates a cautious approach in monetary policy. Taking into
account the elevated volatility in food and energy prices, the Committee decided to cut the interest rates
at a measured scale.
Future monetary policy decisions will be conditional on the improvements in the inflation outlook.
Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation will be monitored closely
and the cautious monetary policy stance will be maintained, by keeping a flat yield curve, until there is a
significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its stance.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working days.

