   
 
No: 2015-50  
PRESS RELEASE  
25 August 2015 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 18 August 2015       
Inflation Developments 
1.  In July, consumer prices increased by 0.09 percent while annual inflation was down 
0.39 points to 6.81 percent. Annual food inflation was flat month-on-month 
whereas falling oil prices brought annual energy in flation down. Services inflation 
declined while core goods inflation rose slightly d ue to exchange rate pass-through. 
The underlying trend of core inflation displayed a slight improvement.  
2.  Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages  remained flat at 9.25 percent in 
July. Annual inflation was slightly up in unprocess ed food but continued to slow in 
processed food. On the unprocessed food front, pric es of fresh fruits and vegetables 
remained favorable, whereas meat prices continued t o rise. Among processed food 
items, prices of bread and cereals continued to aff ect inflation favorably whereas 
prices of other items slightly accelerated. 
3.  Annual energy inflation decreased to 1.58 percent a mid falling fuel prices driven by 
lower oil prices. With the ongoing plunge in oil pr ices in July, annual energy inflation 
is expected to slow further in August.  
4.  Prices of services were up 0.80 percent in July whi le annual services inflation 
dropped by 0.43 points to 8.42 percent. Amid higher  meat prices, prices of catering 
services continued to soar in July. Annual inflatio n increased in rents and 
restaurants-hotels but fell in communication and tr ansport items due to base 
effects. Overall, the underlying trend of services inflation posted a month-on-month 
improvement.  
5.  Annual core goods inflation increased by 0.09 point s to 6.05 percent in July. Annual 
inflation was up in durable goods, down in clothing  and flat in core goods excluding 
clothing and durables. Prices of durable goods refl ected the pass-through effect 
from exchange rate movements. Thanks to the favorab le course in clothing prices, 
the underlying trend of core goods inflation regist ered a fall.  
 
  
Factors Affecting Inflation 
6.  The industrial production index increased strongly by 2.4 percent month-on-month 
in June. Accordingly, industrial production grew by  1.6 percent quarter-on-quarter 
and 3.9 percent year-on-year in the second quarter of 2015. The strong production 
growth in June does not signify an acceleration in economic activity and is rather a 
result of compensating for the output loss led by t he May strikes in the auto 
industry and expediting production before Ramadan. In fact, leading indicators for 
July and August suggest that the industrial product ion might moderate in the second 
half of the year.  
7.  Data on the expenditure side indicate that private consumption demand expanded 
further in the second quarter while investments rem ained weak. Production and 
imports of consumption goods were higher in the sec ond quarter compared to their 
averages in the previous quarter. Meanwhile, produc tion and imports of capital 
goods excluding vehicles fell in the second quarter . Indicators for the construction 
industry do not hint at a recovery for construction  activity. After declining 
dramatically in May amid strikes, domestic sales of  automobiles registered month-
on-month gains in June and July. Thus, having contr ibuted substantially to 
consumption lately, sales of automobiles are believ ed to have supported 
consumption further in July. On the other hand, the  PMI for the July-August period 
and the Business Tendency Survey order indicators f or July do not signal a solid 
domestic demand. Likewise, consumer confidence indi ces remained weak in July. 
Firms’ expectations for future investments increase d slightly in July but remained 
sluggish. In sum, current indicators point to a mod erate outlook for consumption 
demand yet signal no recovery for investments.  
8.  After the first-quarter decline, the non-gold quant ity index, an indicator for external 
demand, posted a quarter-on-quarter increase in the  second quarter. Non-gold 
imports, on the other hand, grew modestly in the se cond quarter. As a 
consequence, deterioration in the real rebalancing process since mid-2014 
somewhat reversed in the second quarter of 2015. Am id lower energy prices, the 
current account balance is expected to improve furt her in the upcoming period. 
However, the relatively weak outlook of exports and  the likely fall in tourism 
revenues may dampen this improvement. 
9.  In May, seasonally adjusted total and nonfarm unemp loyment rates climbed by 0.2 
and 0.3 points month-on-month, respectively. Althou gh employment continued to 
expand in nonfarm sectors, unemployment increased d ue to the rising labor force 
participation, which was flat for some time. Indust rial and services employment 
grew in this period, whereas construction employmen t declined. Industrial 
employment expanded at a stronger pace than in prev ious periods, providing the 
biggest contribution to nonfarm employment growth. Industrial production and 
survey indicators suggest that the industrial secto r will contribute mildly to  employment in the forthcoming period. The support f rom services was more limited 
due to the sluggish tourism industry. The contribut ion from the services industry to 
employment is expected to remain below early 2015 l evels in the upcoming period. 
Thus, prospects for a robust employment growth are slim for the remainder of the 
year. The economic outlook and the waning investmen t tendency pose a downside 
risk to the labor market.   
10.  To sum up, in the second quarter, external demand r emained weak while domestic 
demand contributed to growth moderately. Current in dicators suggest a similar 
outlook for the July-August period. Yet, uncertaint ies in global markets and the weak 
course of consumer and investor confidence add to t he downside risks to growth for 
the upcoming period.  
Monetary Policy and Risks  
11.  Loan growth continues to expand at a reasonable pac e in response to the tight 
monetary policy stance and macroprudential measures . Commercial loan growth 
remains robust while consumer loans continues to de celerate. Recent tightening in 
financial conditions is likely to have some slowing  impact on loan growth in the 
upcoming period. Overall, the pace and the composit ion of loans limit medium-term 
inflationary pressures and contribute to the improv ement in the current account 
balance. 
12.  Recent data releases signal no significant change i n the macroeconomic outlook. 
The favorable developments in the terms of trade an d the moderate course of 
consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the  current account balance. 
External demand remains weak, while domestic demand  contributes to growth 
moderately. Although the recovery in the European e conomy affects the external 
demand positively, ongoing geopolitical development s and the slowdown in global 
trade restrict the export growth. Domestic demand, on the other hand, exhibits a 
modest upward trend driven mainly by consumption. 
13.  Although available data point to an ongoing moderat e growth for economic activity, 
recent developments necessitate close monitoring of  forward-looking signals. 
Recently, rising risk premiums due to global and do mestic uncertainty have led to a 
tightening in financial conditions. This, coupled w ith the already weak confidence 
indices, creates downside risks regarding the domes tic demand for the second half 
of the year.  
14.  Committee members stated that the inflation outlook  has not displayed the 
desirable improvement yet. Although processed food and energy price 
developments affect inflation favorably in the shor t run, the cumulative exchange 
rate movements since early 2015 delay the recovery in the core inflation trend. 
Against this backdrop, the Committee stated that a slightly tighter monetary policy 
stance might be necessary to counterbalance the ups ide risks to inflation.  15.  The Committee indicated that the inflation outlook and the risks would be 
instrumental for the exact implementation of the mo netary tightening. Due to the 
imminent economic slowdown, exchange rate pass-thro ugh to domestic prices will 
be more limited than implied by historical estimati ons. Moreover, falling commodity 
prices partly offset the exchange rate effect. Mean while, downside risks to global 
economy and domestic economic activity remain signi ficant. Accordingly, the 
Committee agreed to adopt a flexible approach for t he implementation of the 
monetary tightening at this point and follow the co nsequences closely to review the 
situation at the next meeting. In conclusion, given  the uncertainty over domestic 
and global markets and the volatility in energy and  food prices, the Committee 
decided to implement a tighter liquidity policy for  as long as deemed necessary. 
16.  Future monetary policy decisions will be conditiona l on the improvements in the 
inflation outlook. Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors that 
affect inflation will be monitored closely and the cautious monetary policy stance 
will be maintained, by keeping a flat yield curve, until there is a significant 
improvement in the inflation outlook. 
17.  The Committee also evaluated the strategy to be pur sued before and after the 
global monetary policy normalization, and decided t o implement policy measures in 
three dimensions: (i) interest rate and Turkish lir a liquidity, (ii) FX liquidity, and (iii) 
policies regarding financial stability. It was conc luded that, considering the current 
global and domestic circumstances, the policies nee d to be tight for the Turkish lira, 
stabilizing for the FX liquidity, and supportive fo r financial stability. The Committee 
decided to publish the related document on the webs ite. 
18.  A significant of the meeting focused on the simplif ication of the monetary policy 
framework. The Committee suggested that monetary po licy framework may be 
simplified by gradually narrowing the interest rate  corridor during global monetary 
policy normalization. It was stated that, eventuall y one week repo rate will assume 
the role of policy rate and represent the stance of  monetary policy. 
19.  The Committee underlined that structural measures t o support financial stability are 
as important as the cyclical policies to stabilize capital flows. Accordingly, the 
published roadmap included measures to support the FX liquidity and to provide 
incentives for core liabilities and long-term borro wing. The Committee stated that 
the past measures on this front have already enhanc ed the resilience of the 
economy and that additional measures may further bo lster these gains. 
20.  Developments in the fiscal policy and tax adjustmen ts are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. T he baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal disc ipline will be maintained and 
there will be no unanticipated hikes on administere d prices. A revision of the 
monetary policy stance may be considered, should th e fiscal policy deviate 
significantly from this framework, and consequently  have an adverse effect on the 
medium-term inflation outlook.  21.  Sustained fiscal discipline has become a fundamenta l element in reducing the 
sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external  shocks in recent years. In the 
current environment of highly uncertain global mark ets, the value added from 
maintaining and further advancing these achievement s is significant. Any measure 
that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings 
deficit will support macroeconomic stability and co ntribute positively to social 
welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term gove rnment securities at low levels. 