   
 
No: 2015-43  
PRESS RELEASE  
30 June 2015 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 23 June 2015       
Inflation Developments 
1.  In May, consumer prices increased by 0.56 percent a nd annual inflation edged up by 
0.2 points to 8.09 percent. Annual food inflation i n this period declined owing to the 
correction in unprocessed food prices. On the other  hand, energy prices maintained 
the upward trend amid the developments in crude oil  prices. Being affected by the 
exchange rate developments, core goods inflation fo llowed an upward course, while 
services inflation remained high. Accordingly, the underlying trend of core inflation 
indicators registered an increase due to core goods . 
2.  Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverage s fell by 1.55 points to 12.81 
percent in May. This fall was mainly driven by unpr ocessed food prices, and partly 
by the slowdown in bread and cereal products prices . Seasonally-adjusted 
unprocessed food prices registered a decline due to  fresh fruits and vegetables. 
Early indicators reveal that, amid the increase in product supply, correction in food 
prices will be more prononunced in June. 
3.  Energy prices rose by 1.18 percent in May, and the group’s annual inflation recorded 
an uptick by 1.8 points and reached 3.38 percent ma inly due to the low base. 
Domestic energy prices have been following an upwar d track since February. This 
rise is led both by the depreciation in the Turkish  lira and the recovery in the 
international oil prices that hit the bottom in Jan uary. 
4.  Prices of services rose by 0.77 percent, and the an nual services inflation increased 
slightly to 8.85 percent in May. This was led by th e price developments in 
restaurants-hotels and transport services, while an nual inflation in other sub-groups 
remained relatively flat. Cumulative increases in f ood prices and the ongoing 
uptrend in meat prices pushed the inflation in rest aurants-hotels group further 
upwards. Annual inflation in transport services hav e been receding since almost six 
months in line with the outlook in international fu el prices. However, upon the 
reversal of the downtrend in fuel prices, transport  became another service item that 
 recorded an increase in this period. Against this b ackground, although remaining flat 
compared in May to the last month, the underlying t rend of services stayed high. 
5.  Annual inflation in core goods rose by 0.83 points to 5.88 percent in May. Among 
sub-groups, annual inflation in durable consumption  goods rose by around 2 points 
to 4.66 percent in this period. Being led by the re cent depreciation of the Turkish lira 
also against the euro, monthly price increases in d urable consumption goods spread 
across all sub-groups, particularly home appliances  and automobiles groups. Annual 
inflation was up in clothing, but declined in goods  excluding clothing and durable 
goods. All in all, the seasonally-adjusted underlyi ng trend of core goods inflation 
posted a significant increase mostly due to exchang e rate pressures. 
 Factors Affecting Inflation 
6.  According to TURKSTAT’s data, Gross Domestic Produc t (GDP) expanded by 2.3 
percent year-on-year in the first quarter of 2015. On the production side, the first 
quarter saw a yearly growth in the value added from  non-construction industries. 
On the spending side, final domestic demand has inc reased due to private and 
public consumption demand. In this period, the ongo ing yet slowing increase in 
domestic demand drove imports higher while net expo rts continued to make a 
negative contribution to annual growth amid declini ng exports caused by weak 
external demand. 
7.  After the solid growth in February and March, indus trial production remained 
unchanged month-on-month in April. On a quarterly b asis, April’s production level is 
2.1 percent above the quarter-ago average. Survey i ndicators suggest that there has 
recently been a slight recovery in the export order s. Meanwhile, domestic demand 
is expected to remain on a moderate upward trend. H owever, the May strikes, 
particularly those in the automotive industry, will  cause output to drop across 
vehicle and base metal industries in this period. I n fact, contrary to survey 
indicators, May survey data point to a plunge in no n-gold exports driven by 
automotive industry exports. Thus, industrial produ ction is expected to record a 
monthly fall in May.  
8.  Data on the expenditure side suggest that private d emand continues to rise in the 
second quarter, albeit more slowly. The production and imports of consumer goods 
grew faster in April than in the first quarter. Sal es of home appliances and 
automobiles were up in the April-May period from th eir first-quarter average. 
Meanwhile, business survey indicators and consumer confidence indices point to a 
moderate domestic demand for the April-May period. Production and imports data 
related to non-vehicle investments remained flat in  April. Likewise, indicators for the 
construction industry and companies’ expectations f or future investments have yet 
to signal some recovery in investment spending. In sum, indicators on the second-
quarter suggest that economic activity grows modest ly, driven by private consumer 
demand.   9.  The terms of trade continues to affect the current account balance positively, which 
however is restrained by the sluggish exports. Lead ing indicators point to some 
increase in the seasonally-adjusted current account  deficit in May. The 
improvement in the current account balance is expec ted to resume starting from 
June with the moderate course of consumer loans and  lower energy prices.  
10.  In March 2015, unemployment rates were down 0.1 poi nt from the previous period 
in seasonally-adjusted terms. Amid non-farm employm ent losses, unemployment 
rates declined on falling non-farm labor force. In this period, construction 
employment increased whereas industrial and service s employment fell. The drop in 
services employment mostly reflects a correction of  the strong growth in previous 
months. Since the last quarter of 2014, non-farm em ployment growth has been 
driven by the services sector, while the increase i n industrial and construction 
employment have been small. The industrial producti on tendency and survey 
indicators suggest that employment might see some r ecovery in the second quarter. 
Yet, other leading indicators have been signaling t hat non-farm employment gains 
are very limited, thus tempering any expectations o f a significant decline in 
unemployment. The current pace of economic activity  and the weakening 
investment tendency pose downside risks to employme nt.  
Monetary Policy and Risks  
11.  Loans continue to expand at a reasonable pace in re sponse to the tight monetary 
stance and the macroprudential measures. The recent  tightening in the overall 
financial conditions is expected to further slow do wn loan growth slightly in the 
second half of the year. The composition of loans c ontinues to evolve in the desired 
direction, with commercial loans growing at a faste r pace than consumer loans. In 
addition, consumer loans excluding home loans grow at a more modest pace. This 
loan outlook not only limits medium-term inflationa ry pressures but also contributes 
to the improvement in the current account balance.  
12.  External demand remains weak while domestic demand contributes to growth 
moderately. The current course of global demand dam pens the improvement in the 
current account balance. The economic recovery in E urope affects external demand 
positively but the ongoing geopolitical tensions an d the slowing global trade will 
cause exports to remain weak for some time. The dec line in cumulative energy 
imports is expected to have a further favorable imp act on the current account 
balance, if the current levels of oil prices are ma intained. Overall, the favorable 
developments in the terms of trade and the moderate  course of consumer loans 
contribute to the improvement in the current accoun t balance, while the relatively 
weaker exports limit this improvement.  
13.  The Committee stated that the inflation outlook has  yet to display the desired 
improvement. Although a partial correction in food prices is expected to ease 
inflation in the short term, the recent exchange ra te movements have delayed the 
improvement in core inflation. This, combined with the uncertainty in global  markets and volatility in energy and food prices, m akes it necessary to maintain the 
cautious stance in monetary policy. The Committee h as therefore decided to keep 
the interest rates at current levels. 
14.  Future monetary policy decisions will be conditiona l on the improvements in the 
inflation outlook. Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors that 
affect inflation will be monitored closely and the cautious monetary policy stance 
will be maintained, by keeping a flat yield curve, until there is a significant 
improvement in the inflation outlook. 
15.  Global markets still pose significant risks. The re duced predictability of global 
economy and the increased uncertainties amid the di vergence among the monetary 
policies of advanced economies cause global markets  to remain highly data-
sensitive. Against this background, the volatility in the risk appetite and capital flows 
continues. 
16.  The Committee underlined that, besides cyclical pol icies to stabilize capital flows, 
structural measures to enhance the resilience of th e financial system are important 
as well. Accordingly, the Committee assessed that t he measures implemented to 
support the FX liquidity, core liabilities, and lon g-term borrowing have enhanced the 
resilience of the economy against global shocks. Ad ditional measures along these 
lines may be adopted if deemed necessary. 
17.  Developments on the fiscal policy and tax adjustmen ts are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. T he baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal disc ipline will be maintained and 
there will be no unanticipated hikes on administere d prices. A revision of the 
monetary policy stance may be considered, should th e fiscal policy deviate 
significantly from this framework, and consequently , have an adverse effect on the 
medium-term inflation outlook. 
18.  Sustained fiscal discipline has become a fundamenta l element in reducing the 
sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external  shocks in recent years. In the 
current environment of highly uncertain global mark ets, the value added from 
maintaining and further advancing these achievement s is significant. Any measure 
that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings 
deficit will support macroeconomic stability and co ntribute positively to social 
welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term gove rnment securities at low levels. 
 
 