   
 
No: 2015-63  
PRESS RELEASE  
28 October 2015 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: 21 October 2015       
Inflation Developments 
1.  In September, consumer prices increased by 0.89 per cent, and annual inflation rose 
by 0.81 points to 7.95 percent. Annual food inflati on remained on an upward trend as 
it did in previous month. Meanwhile, the depreciati on in the Turkish lira pushed 
annual inflation in energy and core goods upwards. Annual services inflation, on the 
other hand, slowed somewhat, yet maintained its hig h levels. In this period, annual 
inflation of core indicators and their seasonally a djusted underlying trend increased 
due to the core goods prices. 
2.  Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverage s rose by around 1 point to 10.73 
percent in September. This rise was led by unproces sed food inflation that reached 
13.23 percent annually driven particularly by the p rices of fresh fruits and vegetables, 
most notably fruits. On the processed food front, t he monthly price increase proved 
lower than the last two months with 0.63 percent an d the downward trend in annual 
inflation continued. Leading indicators of October show that annual food inflation 
may decline due to the unprocessed food prices. Ene rgy prices went up by 0.53 
percent and amid the depreciation in the Turkish li ra, the annual energy inflation 
rose by around 0.7 point to 1.95 percent in Septemb er. 
3.  Prices of services rose by 0.79 percent in Septembe r, and annual services inflation 
edged down by 0.11 points to 8.54 percent. In this period, annual inflation increased 
in communication and other services, but decreased in transport and the 
restaurants-hotels groups. Due to the lagged effect s of oil prices, annual transport 
service inflation maintained its slowing trend. Mea nwhile, the course of food prices 
continued to have a negative effect on the restaura nts-hotels group. Against this 
background, the underlying trend of services inflat ion exhibited an almost flat course 
in September maintaining its high level. 
4.  Annual core goods inflation rose by 1.37 points to 7.94 percent in September. 
Cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira has adv ersely affected prices in the core 
goods group, especially the durable goods in this p eriod. Accordingly, prices of 
 durable goods increased by 2.68 percent on a monthl y basis, and price hikes 
particularly in automobiles and home appliances sto od out. Moreover, prices of core 
goods excluding clothing and durables, where the ex change rate effects are observed 
with a relatively longer lag, also recorded an upsu rge on a monthly basis. Thus, 
seasonally-adjusted indicators show a notable deter ioration in the underlying trend 
of core goods inflation. October indicators point t hat exchange rate pressures 
continue to affect the prices of durable consumptio n goods. 
5.  In sum, the Monetary Policy Committee (the Committe e) assessed that 
developments in energy prices continue to affect in flation favorably, yet exchange 
rate movements delay the improvement in the core in flation trend. 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
6.  In August, industrial production increased by 2.9 p ercent month-on-month, rising 
above the second-quarter average by 0.7 percent in the July-August period. However, 
current data signal a weak outlook for September’s industrial production. The 3 
nonworking days due to the Feast of Sacrifice in Se ptember is expected to translate 
into a sharp drop in the annual percentage change o f the raw data. BTS, PMI and 
export indicators also point to a weaker industrial  production for September. Yet, in 
quarterly terms, industrial production is likely to  post a moderate growth in the third 
quarter. 
7.  In the first half of the year, external demand rema ined weak, while contribution to 
growth came mainly from domestic demand. Data on th e expenditure side suggest a 
more moderate demand outlook in the third quarter r elative to the first half of the 
year. During the July-August period, the production  of consumption goods declined. 
The imports of consumption goods, on the other hand , remained flat on the back of 
rising imports of automobiles despite the fall in m ost of the other subcategories. In 
the third quarter, sales of automobiles and home ap pliances were slightly down 
quarter-on-quarter. Consumer confidence indices con tinued to weaken in 
September. During the July-August period, the produ ction of non-transport capital 
goods increased whereas their imports dropped. Indi cators for the construction 
industry do not point to a robust recovery in const ruction activity, while firms’ 
expectations for future investments remain low. 
8.  The non-gold exports volume index is expected to in crease in the third quarter 
whereas the imports index may decline in line with the weakening domestic demand. 
The growth composition is expected to shift gradual ly towards net exports over the 
upcoming period thanks to a rising demand from the EU countries. This composition 
change and the favorable developments in the terms of trade along with the 
moderate course of consumer loans support the impro vement in the current account 
balance. Data for September and October indicate th at the marked August 
improvement in the current account balance continue s recently.  9.  In July, unemployment rates came down due to nonfar m employment growth. 
Services employment continued to make a sustained c ontribution to employment 
growth, while construction employment picked up aft er having fallen since the first 
quarter. Thus, the average annual employment growth  equaled 3.4 percent for the 
January-July period. Industrial production and surv ey indicators suggest that 
industrial employment, which posted a modest increa se in the first half, may fail to 
contribute to nonfarm employment growth in the thir d quarter. Being considered 
with other leading indicators, a moderate employmen t growth outlook is expected to 
continue in the upcoming period. 
10.  To sum up, current indicators suggest that domestic  demand is likely to be more 
moderate in the forthcoming period than in the firs t half of the year, while external 
demand might see some recovery. Uncertainties in gl obal markets and the weak 
course of confidence indices add to the downside ri sks to the growth and 
employment outlook, yet the rebalancing in the grow th composition supports the 
improvement in the current account balance. Against  this background, aggregate 
demand conditions are likely to support disinflatio n. 
Monetary Policy and Risks  
11.  The Committee evaluated the medium-term forecasts t o be presented in the 
October Inflation Report. In the third quarter, inf lation surpassed the forecast of July  
Inflation Report due to food prices and exchange ra te changes. Unprocessed food 
inflation increased, while core inflation remained high amid cumulative depreciation 
of the Turkish lira. Based on the assumptions under lying inflation forecasts and the 
external conditions, the end-2015 inflation forecas t is revised upward in view of 
revisions to import prices and the exchange rate-dr iven upsurge in core inflation. 
Inflation is expected to hover around current level s for some time due to the effects 
of the exchange rates and start declining afterward s. 
12.  Energy price developments continue to affect inflat ion favorably. The negative 
impact of cumulative exchange rate developments sin ce early 2015 on the inflation 
outlook is partly offset by lower oil prices. Food prices, on the other hand, remain 
volatile mainly due to unprocessed food prices, whi ch poses both upside and 
downside risks to the year-end inflation forecast. The cumulative Turkish lira 
depreciation caused the annual core goods inflation  to rise and the core inflation to 
deteriorate slightly. However, the tight monetary s tance and the moderate domestic 
demand limit the exchange rate pass-through to pric es compared to similar periods 
in previous years. Accordingly, considering the imp act of the uncertainty in domestic 
and global markets on inflation expectations and ta king into account the volatility in 
energy and food prices, the Committee decided to ma intain the tight liquidity stance 
as long as deemed necessary. Future monetary policy  decisions will be conditional on 
the inflation outlook. Taking into account inflatio n expectations, pricing behavior and 
the course of other factors affecting inflation, th e tight monetary policy stance will be 
maintained.  13.  Annual loan growth continues at reasonable levels i n response to the tight monetary 
policy stance and macroprudential measures. The Com mittee highlighted that loan 
growth has displayed a notable deceleration due to tighter financial conditions 
caused by recently increased domestic and external uncertainties. Specifically, 
commercial loans denominated in foreign currency an d consumer loans have lost 
significant momentum. With respect to the compositi on of loans, commercial loans 
continue to grow faster than consumer loans. This c omposition not only limits 
medium-term inflationary pressures, but also helps to improve the current account 
balance. In addition to the moderate economic activ ity, rising loan rates and the 
tightening of other financial conditions also signa l that loan growth may remain 
lower than past years’ averages in the upcoming per iod. 
14.  Final domestic demand was the main driver of growth  in the first half of 2015, while 
external demand remained weak. Indicators for the t hird-quarter point to a 
moderate economic activity, whereas the composition  of growth hints at a slight 
slowdown in domestic demand and a recovery in expor ts. The weak consumer 
confidence and tighter financial conditions curb pr ivate consumption and investment 
demand. The slowing domestic demand and the changes  in real exchange rates drive 
imports lower. On the exports front, despite the ne gative impact of geopolitical 
developments, the rising demand from EU members aff ects Turkey’s exports 
positively. Against this background, the Committee expects the growth composition 
to shift gradually in favor of net exports in the u pcoming period. This shift is expected 
to have a positive impact on the current account ba lance. Moreover, the favorable 
developments in the terms of trade and the sluggish  course of consumer loans 
contribute to the improvement in the current accoun t balance. Accordingly, the 
improvement in the current account balance which be came evident with the August 
figures is expected to continue. 
15.  Uncertainties surrounding global monetary policies and concerns over global growth 
cause financial markets to remain volatile. Thus, p ortfolio flows to emerging 
economies and risk indicators follow a highly volat ile pattern. The Committee stated 
that the measures announced by the CBRT within the context of the “road map 
during the normalization of global monetary policie s” boost the resilience of the 
economy against global shocks. The current monetary  policy stance is tight against 
the inflation outlook, stabilizing for the FX liqui dity, and supportive of financial 
stability. 
16.  In case that the decline in loan growth rates becom e permanent and exchange rates 
continue to face upward pressure over the upcoming period, in addition to 
preserving the tight monetary policy stance, the Co mmittee may take measures to 
support the Turkish lira and loan growth by easing the conditions for the use of 
foreign currency denominated collateral. 
17.  Developments in the fiscal policy and tax adjustmen ts are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. T he baseline monetary policy stance  is formulated under the assumption that fiscal disc ipline will be maintained and there 
will be no unanticipated hikes in administered pric es. A revision of the monetary 
policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from 
this framework, and consequently have an adverse ef fect on the medium-term 
inflation outlook. 
18.  Sustained fiscal discipline has become a fundamenta l element in reducing the 
sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external  shocks in recent years. In the 
current environment of highly uncertain global mark ets, the value added from 
maintaining and further advancing these achievement s is significant. Any measure 
that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings 
deficit will support macroeconomic stability and co ntribute positively to social 
welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term gove rnment securities at low levels. 