   
 
No: 2015-06  
PRESS RELEASE  
27 January 2015 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date:  20 January  2015       
Inflation Developments  
1.  In December, consumer prices edged down by 0.44 per cent and annual inflation fell 
approximately by 1 point to 8.17 percent at the yea r-end. This fall was mainly driven 
by energy and food prices, yet inflation lost pace in almost all sub-groups. The decline 
in energy prices continued at a stronger pace in li ne with the international oil prices. 
The decline in the underlying trend in inflation go t more apparent in services, but 
remained relatively limited in core goods. 
2.  Annual food inflation decreased by 1.64 points to 1 2.73 percent and stood close to 
the assumptions made in the October Inflation Repor t. The seasonally-adjusted data 
pointed to a partial correction in unprocessed food  prices in the last four months, 
which was led particularly by fruits and vegetables . Similarly, despite the 
deceleration in the monthly inflation trend in proc essed food prices in December 
after a long while, the group’s annual inflation re mained high with 13.16 percent. 
Indicators for January signal for a possible declin e in the annual food inflation due to 
the unprocessed food group. 
3.  Energy prices remained on the decline and fell by 1 .86 percent in December. The 
group’s annual inflation plummeted by 4.22 points t o -1.54 percent, hitting the 
lowest level of the index history. The first-round effects of the decline in oil prices on 
energy prices appeared in fuel and bottled gas pric es. Brent crude oil prices 
decreased approximately by USD 45 in the July-Decem ber period, and the direct 
effect of this decline on the consumer inflation th rough fuel and bottled gas prices 
was around -0.76 points in this period. This fall i n these two items continued in 
January. 
4.  Annual core goods inflation receded approximately b y 0.5 points to 8.89 percent. 
This was led by prices of durables and the high-rat ed decline in clothing prices. Prices 
of durable goods edged down by 0.30 percent in Dece mber, and the downtrend in 
the group’s annual inflation continued. The sustain ed mild course of the prices of 
 durable goods accompanied by the gradual eliminatio n of the cumulative exchange 
rate effects suggests a notable decline in core goo ds inflation in the first quarter. 
5.  Prices of services crept up by 0.18 percent and the  group’s annual inflation receded 
by 0.22 points to 8.59 percent in the last month of  the year. The rate of increase in 
the seasonally-adjusted prices of services saw a re markable improvement in the last 
two months. Positive effects of the decline in fuel  prices on the related groups of 
services continued with a slower pace in December. In addition, the inflation trend in 
other services followed a weaker course in the last  two months. The notable fall in oil 
prices is expected to have further positive effects  on the prices of services that are 
closely related to fuel prices. 
6.  The seasonally-adjusted data point to a sustained i mprovement in the underlying 
trend of core inflation indicators. The underlying trend in services inflation displays 
an evident decline, while the improvement in the tr end of core goods inflation 
remained more limited. 
 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
7.  Data announced for the final quarter of 2014 point to a moderate recovery for 
economic activity. Having decreased by a mere 0.1 p ercent month-on-month in 
November, industrial production fell by 0.9 percent  from the third quarter during 
October-November. This development stems largely fr om the weak external demand 
as well as the volatility caused by shifting holida ys and transportation production. On 
the other hand, the recovery observed in other lead ing indicators suggests that the 
information content of the industrial production re garding the underlying trend of 
the fourth quarter economic activity might be limit ed. In fact, there have been 
widespread increases across nonfarm employment rece ntly. Moreover, the import 
volume index for non-gold intermediate goods grew s trongly during October-
November, while non-gold exports increased only mod estly. Survey indicators also 
point to a more benign outlook for the fourth quart er compared to the third quarter. 
The Business Tendency Survey (BTS) and PMI indicato rs for manufacturing have 
shown a more robust growth in the fourth quarter th an in the third quarter, while 
the BTS’ three-month-ahead expectation for producti on and question of three-
month-ahead total orders continued to improve in th e fourth quarter. In this regard, 
the underlying trend of economic activity is consid ered to have recovered 
moderately.   
8.  Data on the expenditure side point to some increase  in private domestic demand for 
the fourth quarter. During October-November, the pr oduction of consumer goods 
was higher than the previous quarter’s average, whe reas their imports were lower. 
An indicator for investments, the production of mac hinery-equipment remained 
unchanged quarter-on-quarter, while its imports inc reased. Domestic sales of 
automobiles and light commercial vehicles grew robu stly in the second half of 2014. 
Mineral production and construction employment, a p roxy for construction  investments, have registered moderate increases. Lo ans, on the other hand, remain 
on a modest upward track. Against this background, domestic demand is expected to 
recover further in the fourth quarter. The improved  investment trend contains 
positive signals for investments over the upcoming period, but the weak consumer 
confidence poses a downside risk.  
9.  External demand indicators point to no improvement for the fourth quarter of 2014 
in the rebalancing process based on goods excluding  gold, which ground to a halt in 
the third quarter. Europe’s slowing economy and geo political tensions have caused 
exports to lose some pace. Thus, during October-Nov ember, exports excluding gold 
increased only slightly from the previous quarter, whereas imports excluding gold 
picked up at a relatively faster pace.  However, the favorable developments in the 
terms of trade and the moderate course of consumer loans will support the 
improvement in the current account balance.  
10.  Having weakened after the first quarter of 2014, no nfarm employment posted 
notable gains during August-October period. Yet, th is nonfarm employment growth 
has been balanced off by the growing nonfarm labor force participation recently, 
causing unemployment to remain steady. Employment g rowth was evident across all 
nonfarm sectors. Specifically, industrial and const ruction sectors are still experiencing 
growth in employment, which started in August. The services sector also has 
contributed further to nonfarm employment growth. A s of October, actual data and 
leading indicators signal some recovery in employme nt for the fourth quarter, but 
considering the increase in labor force participati on, unemployment rates are not 
expected to decrease.  
 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
11.  Loan growth is at reasonable levels in response to the tight monetary policy stance 
and the macroprudential measures. The composition o f loans also continues to 
evolve in the desired direction. While the annual g rowth rate of consumer loans 
hovers around low levels, commercial loans remain r elatively more robust. This loan 
composition not only limits medium-term inflationar y pressures but also contributes 
to the improvement in the current account balance. 
12.  The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) expec ts the growth composition to 
change in favor of domestic demand in the upcoming period. Ongoing weakness in 
growth across European countries, the largest expor t market of Turkey, and 
geopolitical developments in neighboring countries limits the growth of exports. Yet, 
with improved financial conditions and income effec t of falling oil prices, domestic 
demand may see some recovery. In sum, external dema nd remains weak whereas 
domestic demand contributes moderately to growth. T his change in the growth 
composition might lead to a widening in the non-ene rgy current account deficit to 
some extent but the overall current account deficit  is expected to narrow further 
down thanks to the improvement in the energy trade balance.  13.  Downside risks regarding economic activity continue  to be important for the 
upcoming period. The lingering volatility across gl obal financial markets and the 
sluggish course of confidence indices may cause pri vate final demand to provide 
limited support to growth. In the case of an additi onal slowdown in external demand 
and a sizeable decline in global growth rates, the decrease in commodity prices will 
pull inflation down but at the same time lead to no table adverse effects on economic 
activity. Under such circumstances, the Committee w ill employ the policy tools to 
support the economic activity. 
14.  There are many factors that might have a favorable effect on the inflation outlook for 
2015. The recovery of economic activity is likely t o be a gradual one and aggregate 
demand developments are expected to support disinfl ation. The tight monetary 
policy stance and the macroprudential measures cont inue to have a favorable impact 
on inflation, especially on inflation excluding ene rgy and food (core inflation) 
indicators. The adverse impact of cumulative exchan ge rate developments on annual 
inflation is also tapering off. Moreover, falling c ommodity prices, in particular oil 
prices, contribute to disinflation. In fact, there has been a notable decline in medium-
term inflation expectations recently. In light of t hese positive developments, the 
Committee has decided on a measured cut in the one week repo rate. 
15.  Global financial markets have followed a volatile c ourse recently. It was stated that 
capital flows to emerging markets may continue to b e volatile in 2015. The ongoing 
uncertainty about the normalization of global monet ary policies cause the global risk 
appetite and capital flows to be data-sensitive. Th e Committee stated that, against 
heightened global volatility, it would be helpful t o pursue a flexible monetary policy 
in the short term and assessed that it would be app ropriate to keep the overnight 
rates unchanged at this stage. 
16.  The Committee stated that using a flexible interest  rate corridor would cushion the 
economy against the volatility in global markets. I n this regard, inflation expectations, 
the pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation will be further closely 
monitored and the tight monetary policy stance will  be maintained by keeping the 
yield curve flat until there is a significant impro vement in the inflation outlook. 
17.  The meeting also included a discussion of the proje ctions to be published in the 
Inflation Report. Under the current monetary policy  stance, the Committee 
anticipates that inflation will decline to levels c lose to the target by mid-2015. Yet, a 
more persistent reduction in inflation necessitates  a cautious approach in monetary 
policy. The Committee sees that a major opportunity  has emerged to bring inflation 
down permanently in an environment where cost and d emand factors are supportive 
of disinflation. Keeping inflation permanently at l ow levels might contribute to 
investments and potential growth. In this context, the Bank will continue to act 
decisively to bring down inflation and make future monetary policy decisions 
conditional on the pace of improvement in the infla tion outlook. 
18.  Developments on the fiscal policy and tax adjustmen ts are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. T he baseline monetary policy stance  is formulated under the assumption that fiscal disc ipline will be maintained and there 
will be no unanticipated hikes on administered pric es. A revision of the monetary 
policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from 
this framework, and consequently, have an adverse e ffect on the medium-term 
inflation outlook. 
19.  The Committee welcomed the development that the Med ium Term Program 
incorporates disinflation as one of the main object ives. Moreover, it was indicated 
that the implementation of the announced structural  reforms would contribute to 
the potential growth significantly. Any measure to ensure the sustainability of the 
fiscal discipline and reduce the savings deficit wi ll support macroeconomic stability 
and contribute positively to social welfare by keep ing interest rates of long-term 
government securities at low levels. 
 