   
 
No: 2015-73  
PRESS RELEASE  
December 29, 2015 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: 22 December2015       
Inflation Developments 
1.  In November, consumer prices increased by 0.67 perc ent, and annual inflation 
edged up by 0.52 points to 8.10 percent. Annual foo d inflation increased on account 
of the unprocessed food prices, while the annual en ergy inflation rose due to the 
base effect. Meanwhile, the effects of depreciation  in the Turkish lira, albeit waning, 
pushed annual inflation in core goods further upwar ds. Annual services inflation 
maintained its high levels. Thus, annual inflation of core indicators recorded an 
increase, while the underlying trend of inflation i mplied by seasonally adjusted data 
remained flat. 
2.  Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverage s rose by 0.83 points to 9.51 
percent in November. This was driven by annual unpr ocessed food inflation that 
climbed to 11.48 percent mostly due to rising price s of vegetables. On the processed 
food front, the downward trend in annual inflation continued. Energy prices edged 
down by 0.31 percent in tandem with the decline in fuel prices, while the annual 
energy inflation increased to 1.26 percent due to b ase effect in November. The 
annual energy inflation is projected to increase fu rther in December on account of 
the base effect. 
3.  Prices of services increased by 0.17 percent, and a nnual services inflation rose by 
0.16 points to 8.80 percent in November. Annual inf lation slowed in the restaurants-
hotels group, but edged up in other sub-groups. The  seasonally-adjusted data 
indicated a slight slowdown in the underlying trend  of services inflation in 
November. 
4.  Annual core goods inflation rose by 0.41 points to 9.61 percent in November. The 
cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira continu ed to affect core inflation despite 
alleviating in certain items. Monthly price increas es in durable goods decelerated in 
November following higher levels in the preceding t wo months. However, clothing 
prices remained on an increasing path. As a consequ ence, seasonally-adjusted data 
indicated an increase in the underlying trend of co re goods inflation. Meanwhile, 
 the annual inflation in core goods excluding clothi ng and durables reached 8.67 
percent in November. 
5.  In sum, lagged effects of the exchange rate movemen ts continued to delay the 
improvement in inflation, but the decline in oil pr ices contained this effect. Against 
this backdrop, core inflation remained on an upward  trend in November. 
 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
6.  According to data released by TURKSTAT, the Gross D omestic Product (GDP) grew by 
4.0 percent year-on-year in the third quarter of 20 15. In seasonally-adjusted terms, 
national income maintained its robust growth, posti ng an increase by 1.3 percent 
quarter-on-quarter. On the expenditure side, net ex ports made a considerably high 
contribution to quarterly growth amid the rise in e xports and decline in imports. 
Consumption spending continued to expand, while inv estment spending remained 
relatively weak in this quarter. 
7.  Owing to the base effect from number of working day s, industrial production 
registered a notable year-on-year growth in October . In seasonally and calendar-
adjusted terms, October production figure was flat compared to the previous 
month, but 1.0 percent higher than the third-quarte r average. Among indicators of 
November, the manufacture of vehicles and electrici ty generation receded. The 
Business Tendency Survey data and the PMI indicator s for the last three months 
point to an increase in production due to waning do mestic uncertainties. 
Accordingly, industrial production is projected to rise on a quarterly basis in the last 
quarter of the year. 
8.  Data on the expenditure side suggest a more moderat e demand growth in the last 
quarter. Following a slight decline in the third qu arter, sales of automobiles 
remained below the previous quarter’s average in th e October-November period. 
Sales of white goods also recorded a decline in the  October-November period. 
Imports of investment goods receded on a monthly ba sis. Indicators of construction 
investment exhibit a mild pattern, while future inv estment expectations of firms 
point to a recovery in the October-November period.  In sum, domestic demand is 
likely to provide a modest contribution to growth i n the last quarter. 
9.  Recent rebound in confidence indicators ease the do wnside risks to economic 
activity. Business survey data indicate that export  orders over the last three months 
recorded an improvement in the October-November per iod, while domestic orders, 
which remained moderate in the first three quarters , assumed a recovery trend 
recently. Moreover, the consumer confidence has inc reased notably. Likewise, 
investment and employment prospects improved in the  October-November period. 
Against this background, confidence channel is expe cted to boost domestic demand 
in the upcoming period.  10.  Current account balance continues to improve. Altho ugh geopolitical tensions still 
weigh on export growth, the robust increasing trend  in exports to Europe provides 
support to growth and rebalancing. Current account balance is expected to further 
improve in the upcoming period, owing to the lagged  effects of the fall in oil prices 
and the slowdown in credit growth. 
11.  In September 2015, non-farm unemployment rate recor ded a limited decline upon 
the increase in employment. Labor force in non-farm  sectors trended upwards in 
this period. Among sectors, industrial employment c laimed the highest rate of 
increase in September following a decline of three quarters in a row. Employment in 
the construction sector edged up, while that in the  services sector followed a robust 
course. Going ahead, industrial production and surv ey indicators signal a mild 
increase in employment. Given the economic outlook,  the current trends in services 
and construction employment is expected to be maint ained. Overall, non-farm 
unemployment may recede in the last quarter of the year. 
12.  To sum up, recent indicators suggest that domestic demand follows a more 
moderate course in the last quarter of the year, wh ile external demand offers 
positive contribution to growth. Although geopoliti cal tensions pose a downside risk 
to external demand, the recovery in the European ec onomies contributes to 
external demand. Meanwhile, the recovery in consume r confidence as well as 
investment and employment prospects amid waning dom estic uncertainties is likely 
to support domestic demand in the upcoming period. Hence, economic activity is 
expected to maintain a stable growth trend. 
 
Monetary Policy and Risks  
13.  Annual loan growth continues at reasonable levels i n response to the tight monetary 
policy stance and macroprudential measures. Althoug h loan growth has recently 
displayed a downward trend, the recovery in financi al conditions and higher 
revenues due to wage hikes are expected to support loan growth in the upcoming 
period. Commercial loans continue to grow at a fast er pace than consumer loans. 
Such a composition not only limits medium-term infl ationary pressures but also 
supports the improvement in the current account bal ance. 
14.  In the third quarter of the year, growth compositio n turned in favor of net exports 
on a quarterly basis. Following a robust trend in t he first half, domestic demand 
displayed a milder course in the second half of the  year, as projected. Although the 
geopolitical tension resides as a downward risk to external demand, this risk is 
contained by the flexibility of our exports in shif ting markets. In fact, Turkish exports 
towards the European Union countries recently gaine d considerable momentum. 
Moreover, favorable developments in the terms of tr ade and the deceleration in 
consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the  current account balance.  Therefore, the annual current account deficit is ex pected to narrow further in the 
upcoming period. 
15.  The Committee stated that the desired improvement i n the inflation outlook is yet 
to be seen. Although energy price developments cont inue to affect inflation 
favorably, cumulative exchange rate movements delay  the improvement in the core 
inflation trend. Exchange rates followed a relative ly stable course during the final 
quarter of the year amid easing domestic uncertaint ies and the significant 
improvement in the current account balance. However , the lagged pass-through 
from the cumulative depreciation in the first three  quarters continued to have an 
adverse impact on inflation. Accordingly, core infl ation indicators are expected to 
remain at high levels in the short run. In addition , year-end unprocessed food 
inflation is likely to exceed the October Inflation  Report projections. The effect of 
higher-than-targeted inflation on expectations and the acceleration in wage 
increases necessitate close monitoring of the overa ll pricing behavior. Against this 
backdrop, the Committee stated that the tight liqui dity stance would be maintained 
as long as deemed necessary. 
16.  Future monetary policy decisions will be conditiona l on the factors affecting the 
inflation outlook. Taking into account inflation ex pectations, the pricing behavior 
and developments in other factors affecting inflati on, the tight monetary policy 
stance will be maintained. 
17.  The Committee stated that the wide interest rate co rridor has contributed to 
containing exchange rate volatility in times of hei ghtened global volatility. The need 
for such an instrument would be reduced, should the  decline in volatility observed 
after the start of the global policy normalization prove persistent. 
18.  Another factor reducing the need for a wide interes t rate corridor is the effective 
use of policy instruments laid out in the roadmap p ublished in August. Excessive 
fluctuations both in exchange rates and loans have waned owing to the launch and 
effective use of these instruments. 
19.  In this respect, the Committee highlighted the sign ificance of the measures to 
stabilize the foreign exchange liquidity during the  simplification process. To this end, 
it was indicated that the automatic stabilizer feat ure of the ROM will be 
strengthened before the monetary policy simplificat ion, as elaborated in the 
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy for 2016. Moreove r, it was reiterated that 
conditions and limits regarding the pledge of forei gn currency deposits as collateral 
against Turkish lira operations might be revised be fore and during simplification. 
20.  Against this background, monetary policy simplifica tion steps would begin with the 
next meeting, should the decline in volatility prov e persistent. The interest rate 
corridor is aimed to be narrower and more symmetric al around the one-week repo 
rate. The nature and the pace of simplification ste ps will depend on the factors 
affecting the volatility in global and domestic mar kets.  21.  Developments in the fiscal policy and tax adjustmen ts are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. T he baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal disc ipline will be maintained and 
there will be no unanticipated hikes in administere d prices. A revision of the 
monetary policy stance may be considered, should th e fiscal policy deviate 
significantly from this framework, and consequently  have an adverse effect on the 
medium-term inflation outlook. 
22.  Sustained fiscal discipline has become a fundamenta l element in reducing the 
sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external  shocks in recent years. Given the 
current environment of highly uncertain global mark ets, maintaining and further 
advancing these achievements is significant. Any me asure to ensure the 
sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings deficit will support 
macroeconomic stability and contribute positively t o social welfare by keeping 
interest rates of long-term government securities a t low levels. 