   
 
No: 2015-37  
PRESS RELEASE  
27 May 2015 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: 20 May 2015       
      Inflation Developments    
1.  In April, consumer prices increased by 1.63 percent  and annual inflation rose by 0.30 
points to 7.91 percent. This rise in annual inflati on stemmed from the energy group, 
and particularly fuel prices. Inflation in food and  related services maintained the high 
course, while the annual consumer inflation excludi ng food and catering services 
posted a slight increase, yet remained low. Annual core inflation indicators edged 
down again, whereas underlying trends thereof regis tered some increase in this 
period. 
2.  Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverage s rose by 0.24 points to 14.36 
percent in April. This was mainly led by unprocesse d food prices, the annual inflation 
of which hit 18.88 percent. Among the unprocessed i tems, fresh vegetables-fruits 
and meat stood out with an ongoing adverse outlook.  On the other hand, annual 
inflation receded in processed food prices while mo nthly price increases were high in 
sub-items excluding bread. The contribution of food  prices to annual inflation 
continued to rise and reached 3.51 points in April.  Energy prices rose by 0.43 percent 
in April amid rising fuel and water prices, and the  group’s annual inflation reached 
1.62 percent mainly due to the base effect.  
3.  Prices of services rose by 0.74 percent in April, a nd the annual services inflation 
edged up by 0.2 points to 8.74 percent. Cost pressu res driven by food prices 
continued, while the effects of the recent volatili ty in exchange rates have been 
observed in the sensitive groups. The underlying tr end of services has remained flat 
compared to the last month and stayed high. 
4.  Annual inflation of core goods decreased by 0.48 po ints to 5.06 percent in April. 
Annual inflation was down across all main categorie s, particularly clothing. Lagged 
effects of exchange rate developments proved appare nt in monthly price 
developments. Accordingly, the underlying trend of core goods inflation recorded 
some increase. 
 5.  To sum up, the ongoing cautious monetary policy sta nce along with domestic 
demand conditions continue to have a favorable impa ct on core inflation, whereas 
the recently-elevated volatility in exchange rates has limited the improvement in core 
inflation. Moreover, volatility in energy and food prices affects the consumer inflation 
adversely.  
Factors Affecting Inflation 
6.  In March, seasonally and calendar-day adjusted indu strial production grew by 2.2 
percent month-on-month, recording a robust increase  for the second month in a 
row. Thus, industrial production grew by 1.2 percen t quarter-on-quarter and 1.3 
percent year-on-year in the first quarter. Producti on developments have varied 
across industries. The weak external demand affecte d the textiles industry negatively 
while weather conditions dampened the other mineral s industry, which is sensitive to 
construction activity. These developments drove the  industrial production down by 
0.4 points in the first quarter. However, the indus tries of vehicles, other transport 
vehicles, pharmaceuticals, and oil products added a  total of 1.6 points to the 
quarterly growth.  
7.  Although industrial production increases solidly, s urvey indicators present a weaker 
outlook. The PMI production data have been hovering  below 50 since the beginning 
of the year. The equilibrium value of the Business Tendency Survey (BTS) question 
about production over the last three months has bee n declining gradually since 
October 2014. Survey indicators for domestic and ex ternal demand confirm the weak 
course of exports and do not produce strong signals  about domestic demand. Thus, 
PMI data on new orders and new export orders have r emained below 50 since 
January. Orders over the last three months and thre e-month-ahead order 
expectations from BTS have been weakening in both e xports and the domestic 
market. In sum, while industrial production grew ro bustly in the first quarter, in line 
with the weak production-related survey indicators since early 2015 it is assessed 
that the underlying trend in production remains mod erate and economic recovery 
may exhibit a gradual path.  
8.  Data on the expenditure side point to an increase i n private demand for the first 
quarter. In this period, the production and imports  of consumer goods posted a 
quarterly growth, particularly faster for imports. After the January contraction, sales 
of home appliances were up month-on-month in Februa ry and March, signaling a 
positive outlook for private consumer demand. Meanw hile, the rapid increase in 
automobile sales that contributed significantly to the recent consumption growth 
continued into April. Among indicators for investme nt goods, the production and 
imports of machinery-equipment recorded a quarterly  and yearly decline in the first 
quarter. Yet, the robust sales of light and heavy c ommercial vehicles hint at an 
improvement in investments. Hence, it is assessed t hat private demand continues to 
recover.   9.  Data on production and sales offer a positive outlo ok for private demand, yet 
confidence indices point to downside risks. The con sumer confidence has been weak 
for a long time. The BTS data on investment tendenc y and overall economic activity 
and TURKSTAT’s confidence indices for retail trade,  services, and construction sectors 
also show that expectations of firms have yet to be gin improving. The lingering 
volatility in financial markets restrains the impro vement of financial conditions. All 
these developments suggest that the recovery in pri vate demand will be moderate 
and gradual. 
10.  In the first quarter of 2015, non-gold exports were  down while non-gold imports 
were up from their past quarterly averages. This ou tlook is largely driven by exports 
that have been weaker than domestic demand due to t he slowing growth across 
trading partners. Nevertheless, the favorable devel opments in the terms of trade and 
the moderate course of consumer loans contribute to  the improvement in the 
current account balance. 
11.  In February 2015, total and nonfarm unemployment ra tes decreased by about 0.1 
point. Compared with January, both labor and employ ment growth slowed across 
nonfarm sectors. Construction employment declined, whereas industrial employment 
remained flat. Having accelerated from previous per iods, the employment growth in 
services was the major driver of nonfarm employment  growth. The recently released 
industrial production and survey data show that emp loyment might recover 
somewhat in the second quarter. Yet, the current pa th of economic activity and the 
weakening investment tendency pose downside risks t o employment. 
12.  To summarize, external demand remains weak, while d omestic demand contributes 
to growth moderately. The uncertainty over global m arkets and the weak course of 
consumer and investor confidence suggest that econo mic activity will remain 
moderate in the upcoming period. Based on this outl ook, the aggregate demand 
conditions support disinflation. 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
13.  Loan growth continues at reasonable levels in respo nse to the tight monetary policy 
stance and macroprudential measures. The compositio n of loans also continues to 
evolve in the desired direction. Commercial loans g row at a faster pace than 
consumer loans. This loan outlook not only limits m edium-term inflationary pressures 
but also contributes to the improvement in the curr ent account balance. Moreover, 
the favorable developments in the terms of trade co ntinue to support the 
improvement in the current account balance. 
14.  Industrial production gained some momentum in the f irst quarter partly owing to the 
thriving vehicle production. Consumer confidence an d investment tendency point to 
a moderate private domestic demand, while leading i ndicators suggest that external 
demand is relatively weak. Recent signs of recovery  in Europe might be a 
development that would boost the external demand. H owever, lingering volatility in  global financial markets and the weak course of con fidence indices are the risk 
factors that may limit the contribution of the priv ate final demand to growth. To sum 
up, external demand remains weak while domestic dem and contributes to growth 
moderately. Thus, the recovery in economic activity  is expected to be gradual and 
aggregate demand conditions are expected to continu e supporting disinflation.  
15.  The ongoing cautious monetary policy along with pru dent fiscal and macroprudential 
policies continue to have a favorable impact on inf lation, especially inflation 
excluding energy and food (core inflation indicator s). However, recently elevated 
volatility in the exchange rates has limited the im provement in the core inflation, as 
stated in the April Inflation Report. The moderate course of aggregate demand 
conditions and low levels of international commodit y prices support disinflation but 
the recent fluctuations in energy prices curtail th is contribution. Food prices, which 
are still at high levels, remain as the main risk f actor for inflation. However, with the 
introduction of new seasonal products in summer mon ths, food prices are likely to 
see a notable correction. 
16.  Global markets continue to follow a volatile course . Reduced predictability of global 
economy and increased uncertainties amid the diverg ence among the monetary 
policies of advanced economies cause global markets  to remain highly data-sensitive. 
Against this background, the volatility in the risk  appetite and capital flows continues. 
The Committee assessed that the measures taken to s upport the FX liquidity, core 
liabilities and long-term borrowing enhanced the re silience of the economy against 
global shocks. Additional measures along these line s may continue to be taken if 
deemed necessary.  
17.  In conclusion, the global market uncertainty and th e unfavorable effects of the 
exchange rate volatility on core inflation coupled with the volatility in energy and 
food prices make it necessary to maintain the cauti ous stance in monetary policy. 
Future monetary policy decisions will be conditiona l on the improvements in the 
inflation outlook. Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors that affect 
inflation will be monitored closely and the cautiou s monetary policy stance will be 
maintained, by keeping a flat yield curve, until th ere is a significant improvement in 
the inflation outlook. 
18.  Developments on the fiscal policy and tax adjustmen ts are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. T he baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal disc ipline will be maintained and there 
will be no unanticipated hikes on administered pric es. A revision of the monetary 
policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from 
this framework, and consequently, have an adverse e ffect on the medium-term 
inflation outlook. 
19.  The implementation of the announced structural refo rms is expected to contribute 
significantly to potential growth. Any measure that  would ensure the sustainability of 
the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings defici t will support macroeconomic  stability and contribute positively to social welfa re by keeping interest rates of long-
term government securities at low levels. 
 
 