   
 
Sayı: 2015-59 
PRESS RELEASE  
1 October 2015 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: 22 September 2015       
Inflation Developments 
1.  In August, consumer prices increased by 0.40 percen t, and annual inflation edged up 
by 0.33 points to 7.14 percent. In this period, con sumer prices were affected by the 
lagged impact of the depreciation in the Turkish li ra. Annual food inflation 
increased, whereas falling oil prices continued to pull energy inflation down. Annual 
inflation in core goods and services edged up, lead ing to an increase in core inflation 
indicators. Seasonally adjusted data indicate that the underlying recent trend of 
inflation slowed down, yet remained at high levels.  
 
2.  Following the flat course in July, annual inflation  in food and non-alcoholic 
beverages rose by 0.46 points to 9.71 percent in Au gust. Soaring fruit prices was the 
main driver of the increase in food inflation. More over, meat prices continued to 
increase, contributing to the upside movement in th e unprocessed food inflation. 
On the processed food front, the downward trend in annual inflation continued, but 
monthly price increase remained still high at 0.83 percent. Leading indicators on 
September inflation point that annual unprocessed f ood inflation may post another 
increase with rising fresh fruits and vegetables pr ices. Meanwhile, energy prices 
went down by 0.76 percent in August and continued t o affect inflation favorably. 
With the ongoing decline in crude oil prices, annua l energy inflation receded to 1.26 
percent. 
 
3.  Prices of services rose by 1.14 percent in August, and annual services inflation crept 
up by 0.24 points to 8.65 percent. In this period a nnual inflation increased across all 
main subcategories except transport, reflecting the  effects of the depreciation in the 
Turkish lira. Ongoing cost pressures driven by food  inflation pushed prices in the 
restaurants-hotels group up by 2.05 percent, leadin g this group to hit the highest 
monthly inflation of the last nine years. On the ot her hand, amid the low course of 
crude oil prices, annual inflation in transport ser vices remained at modest levels. 
Overall, underlying trend of services inflation edg ed up in August. 
  
4.  Annual core goods inflation rose by 0.52 points to 6.58 percent in August. 
Cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira has adv ersely affected prices in the core 
goods group, especially the durable goods. Durable goods annual inflation increased 
to 7.04 percent, led by the rising of prices electr ical and non-electrical appliances. 
Indicators on September point that exchange rate pa ss-through will continue to 
affect the prices of durable consumption goods. 
 
5.  In sum, the Monetary Policy Committee (the Committe e) assessed that 
developments in energy prices continue to affect in flation favorably, yet exchange 
rate movements delay the improvement in the core in flation trend. 
 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
6.  According to TurkStat, GDP grew by an annual 3.8 pe rcent in the second quarter of 
2015. Final domestic demand increased on the back o f both private and public 
sectors, with private demand registering a stronger  growth. Private consumption 
and private investments, respectively, contributed the most to the second quarter’s 
annual growth. The imports expanded with the contin ued rise in domestic demand 
while the weak foreign demand brought exports down,  causing net exports to 
contribute negatively to annual growth. 
 
7.  In July, industrial production decreased by 1.5 per cent month-on-month in 
seasonally adjusted terms, falling below the second -quarter average by 0.9 percent. 
This production drop is largely attributed to the c orrection of June’s sharp increase 
and the reduced number of working days due to facto rs such as bridge days. Leading 
indicators for August signal a mild rise in product ion. 
 
8.  Data on the expenditure side indicate that domestic  demand may be more 
moderate in the second half than in the first half.  In July, the production of 
consumption goods posted a monthly decline whereas the imports of consumption 
goods grew on the back of automobiles demand. The s trong uptrend in the sales of 
automobiles slowed somewhat during July-August peri od. Sales of home appliances 
were slightly down during July-August compared to t he second quarter. Consumer 
confidence indices continue to weaken as of August.  Indicators for the construction 
industry do not reveal a robust recovery in constru ction activity, while firms’ 
expectations for future investments hint at no sign ificant improvement.  
 
9.  Due to the first half’s weaker exports and rising c onsumption demand, the current 
account balance ceased to improve. Data for August and September point to a 
slowing import demand while export orders seem to h ave recovered slightly. The 
growth composition is expected to shift gradually t owards net exports over the 
upcoming period thanks to a rising demand from EU m embers. Amid this  composition change and lower oil prices, the improv ement in the current account 
balance is expected to be more significant in the f orthcoming period.  
 
10.  In June, nonfarm employment remained flat while lab or force participation 
continued to rise. Thus, unemployment rates registe red an increase. Services 
employment remained on the rise whereas industrial and construction employment 
decreased marginally. Industrial production and sur vey indicators suggest that 
industrial employment may fail to contribute to non farm employment growth in the 
third quarter after the modest first-half increase.  Taken with the other leading 
indicators, no major gains are expected for employm ent in the upcoming period. 
The economic outlook and the weak investment tenden cy pose a downside risk to 
employment.  
 
11.  To sum up, current indicators suggest that domestic  demand growth is likely to be 
more moderate in the forthcoming period than in the  first half of the year. 
Uncertainties in global markets and the weak course  of confidence indices add to 
the downside risks to the growth outlook and employ ment. Thus, demand 
conditions are likely to support disinflation.  
 
Monetary Policy and Risks  
12.  Annual loan growth continues at reasonable levels i n response to the tight monetary 
policy stance and macroprudential measures. The Com mittee highlighted that loan 
growth has displayed a notable deceleration due to tighter financial conditions 
recently. Specifically, FX commercial loans and con sumer loans have lost significant 
momentum in recent weeks, which, as evaluated by th e Committee, is mostly 
demand-driven.  
 
13.  External demand remained weak in the first half of the year, while domestic 
demand contributed to growth moderately. The weak c onsumer confidence and the 
recent sales data point to a slowdown in consumptio n demand for the second half 
of the year. The recent increase in relative prices  of investment and durable goods 
will curb the demand in these sectors. Accordingly,  imports are expected to slow in 
the upcoming period. On the exports front, despite the negative impact of 
geopolitical developments, the rising demand from E U members is likely to affect 
Turkey’s exports positively. Against this backgroun d, the Committee expects the 
growth composition to shift gradually towards net e xports in the upcoming period, 
which will have a favorable impact on the current a ccount balance. Moreover, the 
developments in the terms of trade and the moderate  course of consumer loans 
contribute to the improvement in the current accoun t balance. Accordingly, the 
current account balance is expected to display a si gnificant improvement starting 
with the August figures.  
  14.  Energy price developments continue to affect inflat ion favorably. The upward 
impact of the exchange rate developments on inflati on is partly offset by lower oil 
prices. Yet, the accumulated pass-through from exch ange rate developments  delay 
the recovery in the core inflation trend. Leading i ndicators signal that the exchange 
rate pass-through to domestic prices continue to ex ert upside pressures on inflation. 
Considering these developments and the recent incre ase in inflation expectations, 
the Committee stated that the overall pricing behav ior should be monitored closely.  
 
15.  Food prices remain volatile. Even though unprocesse d food prices are expected to 
post a downward correction in the final quarter, th e course of food prices as of 
September poses an upside risk to the year-end food  inflation forecast. In addition, 
the ongoing volatility across global markets necess itates a cautious monetary 
stance. Overall, considering the impact of the unce rtainty in domestic and global 
markets on inflation expectations and taking into a ccount the volatility in energy 
and food prices, the Committee decided to maintain the tight liquidity stance as 
long as deemed necessary. 
 
16.  Future monetary policy decisions will be conditiona l on the improvements in the 
inflation outlook. Inflation expectations, the pric ing behavior and other factors that 
affect inflation will be monitored closely and the cautious monetary policy stance 
will be maintained, by keeping a flat yield curve, until there is a significant 
improvement in the inflation outlook. 
 
17.  The Committee also assessed the measures already im plemented and to be 
implemented in the context of the “road map during the normalization of global 
monetary policies”. The measures announced within t he road map has largely been 
put into effect over the last one month. Accordingl y, further measures were taken 
to support the FX liquidity, core liabilities and l ong-term borrowing. Moreover, the 
operational framework of the liquidity policy was s implified. In this respect, the 
overnight borrowing facility provided for primary d ealers via repo transactions was 
terminated and collateral conditions were simplifie d. According to the Committee, 
the arrangements regarding the use of FX deposits a s collateral for TL operations 
will increase the efficiency of the banks’ liquidit y management practices. It was 
underlined that all these steps will continue to bo ost the resilience of the economy 
against global shocks. The Committee reiterated tha t the Central Bank’s current 
monetary policy stance can be summarized as tight a gainst the inflation outlook, 
stabilizing for FX liquidity, and supportive for fi nancial stability. 
 
18.  Developments in the fiscal policy and tax adjustmen ts are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. T he baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal disc ipline will be maintained and 
there will be no unanticipated hikes in administere d prices. A revision of the  monetary policy stance may be considered, should th e fiscal policy deviate 
significantly from this framework, and consequently  have an adverse effect on the 
medium-term inflation outlook. 
 
19.  Sustained fiscal discipline has become a fundamenta l element in reducing the 
sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external  shocks in recent years. In the 
current environment of highly uncertain global mark ets, the value added from 
maintaining and further advancing these achievement s is significant. Any measure 
that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings 
deficit will support macroeconomic stability and co ntribute positively to social 
welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term gove rnment securities at low levels. 