   
 
No: 201 5-16 
PRESS RELEASE  
3 March 2015  
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE  MEETING  
Meeting Date : 24 February  2015        
Inflation Developments  
1. In January , consumer prices increased by 1 .10 percent and annual inflation fell  by 
0.93  point to 7.24  percent. This fall was mainly driven by energy and food prices, and 
inflation lost pace in almost all sub -groups  except services . The decline in energy 
prices continued in line with falling  international oil prices. The improvement in the 
underlying trend of core indicators  was sustained due to core goods.  
2. Annual food inflation decreased by 1. 76 points to 1 0.97 percent. Although t he 
seasonally -adjusted unprocessed food prices increase d in January following the 
decline in the last four months, the group’s inflation fell to 9.39  percent.  Processed 
food prices  recorded a monthly upsurge, yet the group’s annual  inflation re ceded to 
12.56 percent  also due to the high base . Being also affected by adverse weather 
conditions, t he indicators for February signal a possible uptick  in the annual food 
inflation due to the unprocessed food group . 
3. Energy prices remained on the decline and fell by 0.78 percent in Janua ry. The 
group’s annual infla tion droppe d by 1.50 points to -3.04 percent, hitting the lowest 
level of the index history. The effects of the decline in oil prices on energy prices 
appeared in fuel and bottled gas prices, while the upsurge  in municipal water tariffs 
was remarkable.  Mea nwhile, the increase in fuel prices after six months in February 
due to the depreciation in the Turkish lira and the rise in oil prices indicate s that the 
contribution of energy group  to the decline in annual consumer inflation will  be 
restricted to some extent . 
4. Annual core goods inflat ion edged down approximately by 0.3  points to 8. 57 percent. 
This was led by prices of good s excluding clothing, particularly durable consumption 
goods . Although the group’s annual inflation decreased mostly owing to the base  
effect, prices surged across durables. In groups excluding durables and clothing, 
annual inflation decreased while there were increases in the monthly  inflation . 
Recent exchange rate developments may restrict the fall in core goods inflation, yet a 
notable decline in core goods is expected in the first quarter.  
 5. Prices of services increased by 1.06 percent and the group’s annual inflation crept up  
by 0. 14 points to 8. 73 percent  mainly due to communication and other services 
groups . Moreover, mainten ance -repair and healthcare services also saw an increase 
in inflation in this period.  Additionally, the annual inflation in the restaurants -hotels 
group maintained its high course owing to the negative developments in fo od prices. 
Accordingly, the seasonal ly-adjusted data exhibit an increase in the underlying trend 
of services inflation .  
6. In sum, January was marked by a sustained improvement in the underlying trend of 
core inflation indicators and favorable figures in energy inflation amid the lingering 
fall in international oil prices. Core inflation is projected to decline further in the 
upcoming period in line with  the maintained reasonable levels in inflation trends.  
Factors Affecting Inflation  
7. Data announced for the final quarter of 2014 point to a limited recovery for 
economic activity. Industrial production increased  1.2 percent in December, but fell 
by 0.5 percent quarter -on-quarter due to the volatility in  other transport vehicles and 
the Fe ast of the Sacrifice. The dampening effects of the weak external demand have 
become more evident, while domestic demand has yet to accelerate adequately , 
which keeps economic activity from a robust recovery.  
8. According to data on the expenditure side, in t he final quarter of 2014, the 
production of consumer goods was higher than the previous quarter’s average, while 
the decline in imports of consumer goods was limited . Domestic sales of automobiles 
and home appliances grew robustly. Loans, on the other hand , remained on a modest 
upward track. The weak consumer confidence was a limiting factor  on consumer 
spending  in this quarter . While the production of machinery -equipment , an indicator  
for investments, fell slightly, its imports increased significantly.  Mineral production  
and construction employment, variables related to construction investments, have 
registered some recovery. The investment trend that improved from the first half of 
2014 contains positive signals for investments. Against this background, private 
domestic demand is believed to have increased moderately in the fourth quarter.  
9. External demand indicators suggest that net exports did not contribute  to growth in 
the fourth quarter of 2014. The slowing growth rates across Turkey’s major trading 
partners and geopolitical tensions dampened export growth, while the modest 
recovery in domestic demand led to an increase in  import demand. Thus, there has 
been no improvement for the fourth quarter of 2014 in the rebalancing process 
based on goods excluding gold. However, the favorable developments in the terms of 
trade and the moderate course of consumer loans contribute to t he improvement in 
the current account balance.  
10. Data available for the first quarter of 2015 indicate that the fourth -quarter outlook 
will persist. January’s PMI and February’s Business Tendency Survey ( BTS) indicators 
point to no acceleration in production . The increased volatility in financial markets  and the weak consumer confidence restrain domestic demand. Moreover, external 
trade data for January show that exports remain weak due to external demand.  
11. According to seasonally adjusted data, unemployment p icked up in November 2014 
due to sluggish nonfarm employment. Construction employment has been recovering 
since August, yet the recent growth in industrial employment has been balanced off 
by a decline. The services sector has continued to contribute  to no nfarm 
employment. PMI and BTS survey indicators that reflect actual and expected 
employment figures for firms  remain elevated as of January 2015 and signal no 
additional worsening for industrial employment. However, the limited increase in 
industrial produ ction suggests that risks are on the downside for industrial 
employment. As of January 2015, indicators for the labor market point to an weak  
employment growth and a stagnant unemployment rate.  
Monetary Policy and Risks  
12. Loan growth continues at reasonable levels in response to the tight monetary policy 
stance and macroprudential measures. The composition of loans also continues to 
evolve in the desired direction. The annual growth rate of commercial loans is quite 
strong relative to  that of consumer loans. This loan composition not only limits 
medium -term inflationary pressures but also contributes to the improvement in the 
current account balance.  
13. The weak external demand caused by the sluggish growth across European countries, 
the largest export market for  Turkey, and geopolitical developments in neighboring 
countries limits the growth of exports. Yet, domestic demand may see some gradual 
recovery , also with the income effect of lower  oil prices. In sum, exte rnal demand 
remains weak while  domestic demand contributes to growth moderately. Thus, the 
growth composition may change in favor of domestic demand in the upcoming 
period. This change in the growth composition might lead to a widening in the non -
energy current account deficit to some extent but the overall current account deficit 
is expected to narrow further down thanks to the improvement in the energy trade 
balance.  
14. Downside risks regarding economic activity continue to be important for the 
upcoming period. The lingering volatility a cross global financial markets and the 
sluggish course of confidence indices may cause private final demand to provide 
limited support to growth. In the case of an additional slowdown in external demand 
and a sizeable decline in global growth rates, the de crease in commodity prices will 
pull inflation down but at the same time lead to notable adverse effects on domestic 
economic activity. Under such circumstances, the Committee will employ the policy 
tools to support the economy.  
15. The ongoing cautious monetary policy along with prudent fiscal and macroprudential 
policies are having a favorable impact on inflation, especially on inflation excluding 
energy and food (core inflation indicators). In this regard, the Committee  anticipates  that core inflation will continue to decline. Moreover, lower level of  commodity 
prices, particularly oil, continue to support disinflation. However, the recent volatility 
in oil prices and exchange rates might limit the support provided by energy  group  to 
disinflation. Meanw hile, food prices may see some volatility, especially in 
unprocessed food, due to weather conditions.  
16. Having the  foreseen decline in inflation to be more persistent is important  for 
maintaining the progress made in inflation  over the last decade. A persist ent 
decrease in inflation will contribute to the fall in long -term real interest rates by 
leading to decline s in risk and inflation premia . These developments will have a 
favorable impact on public balance and potential growth. In this context, a more 
pers istent reduction in inflation necessitates a cautious approach in monetary policy. 
Taking into account the heightened volatility in food and energy prices, the 
Committee cut the interest rates but with a cautious approach kept the rate cuts at a 
measured s cale. Future monetary policy decisions will be conditional on the 
improvements in the inflation outlook. Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and 
other factors that affect inflation will be monitored closely and the cautious 
monetary policy stance will  be maintained, by keeping a flat yield curve, until there is 
a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.  
17. Global financial markets continue to follow a volatile course. The ongoing uncertainty 
about global monetary policies cause the global risk ap petite and capital flows to be 
data -sensitive. The Federal Reserve’s (Fed) policy normalization process and the 
European Central Bank’s new quantitative easing program have been major factors 
affecting financial markets. The Co mmittee emphasized that the C BRT has a rich set 
of policy tools to use against an earlier -than -expected policy rate hike by the Fed. 
Yet, higher risk of deflation in developed countries increases the probability of 
postponement  in the normalization of monetary policies. The Committee pointed out 
that, in an environment of continued uncertainty over global financial markets and 
economic activity, prudential borrowing is crucial to limit the accumulation of macro -
financial risks.  
18. Developments on the fiscal policy and tax adjustments are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained and there 
will be no unanticipated hikes on administered prices. A revision of the monetary 
policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from 
this framework, and consequently, have an adverse effect on the medium -term 
inflation outlook.  
19. The Committee welcomed the development that the Medium Term Program 
incorporates disinflation as one of the main objectives. Moreover, it was indicated 
that the implementation of the announced structural reforms would contribute 
significantly to potential  growth. Any measure to ensure the sustainability of the 
fiscal discipline and reduce the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability  and contribute positively to social welfare by keeping interest rates of long -term 
government securities at low l evels.  
 