   
 
No: 2015-68  
PRESS RELEASE  
1 December 2015 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 24 November 2015       
Inflation Developments 
1.  In October, consumer prices increased by 1.55 perce nt, and annual inflation edged 
down by 0.37 points to 7.58 percent. Annual food in flation declined on account of 
the unprocessed food prices, while the annual energ y inflation decreased due to the 
base effect. Meanwhile, the depreciation in the Tur kish lira pushed annual inflation in 
core goods upwards. Annual services inflation, on t he other hand, maintained its high 
levels. Accordingly, annual inflation of core indic ators and their seasonally adjusted 
underlying trend registered increases. 
2.  Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverage s declined by around 2 points to 
8.69 percent in October. This decline was led by an nual unprocessed food inflation 
that receded to 9.40 percent driven particularly by  the prices of vegetables. On the 
processed food front, the downward trend in annual inflation continued. Leading 
indicators of November show that annual food inflat ion may increase due to the 
unprocessed food prices. Energy prices went up by 0 .77 percent while the annual 
energy inflation decreased by around 1.8 points to 0.12 percent due to base effect in 
October. 
3.  Prices of services rose by 0.71 percent in October,  and annual services inflation 
edged up by 0.11 points to 8.65 percent. Annual inf lation decreased in the 
restaurants-hotels group, remained flat in rent and  increased in other services. 
Meanwhile, prices of catering services maintained t he upward trend and the annual 
inflation in this group, with 14.87 percent, remain ed as the determinant of the high 
course of prices of services. Against this backgrou nd, the underlying trend of services 
inflation exhibited an almost flat course in Octobe r maintaining its high level. 
4.  Annual core goods inflation rose by 1.25 points to 9.19 percent in October. The 
cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira pushed the prices of core goods by 1.75 
percent on a monthly basis. Witnessing the exchange  rate effects with a longer lag, 
the annual inflation in core goods excluding clothi ng and durables reached 8.49 
percent. Moreover, the clothing group recorded the highest October price increase of 
 the index history. Accordingly, seasonally-adjusted  data showed a sustained increase 
in the underlying trend of core goods inflation. 
5.  In sum, the Monetary Policy Committee (the Committe e) assessed that 
developments in energy prices continue to affect in flation favorably, yet cumulative 
effects of the exchange rate movements delay the im provement in the core inflation 
trend. 
Factors Affecting Inflation  
6.  After the sharp monthly increase in August, industr ial production remained flat in 
September, thus recording a quarterly growth of 1.1  percent in the third quarter. Due 
to fewer working days in September, industrial prod uction declined by a yearly 7.9 
percent, yet it might pick up again year-on-year th anks to October’s increased 
working days. The BTS data on production over the l ast three months and the PMI 
indicators point to a moderate monthly growth for O ctober. Industrial production has 
become increasingly volatile due to bridge days and  the changing number of working 
days. Yet, seasonally and calendar adjusted three-m onth averages suggest that 
production remains on the rise. 
7.  Data on the expenditure side suggest a more moderat e demand outlook in the third 
quarter relative to the first half of the year. The  production and imports of 
consumption goods declined in the third quarter. Th e retail sales volume index 
slowed quarter-on-quarter, while non-food retail sa les posted a quarterly contraction 
in the third quarter. After a robust second-quarter , imports of investment goods 
were down in the third quarter on a quarterly basis . Data on construction 
employment and the production and imports of minera ls indicate a stable pattern in 
construction investments. All in all, domestic dema nd is likely to provide a modest 
contribution to growth in the third quarter. 
8.  The non-gold exports volume index rose in the third  quarter whereas the imports 
index fell in line with moderate domestic demand. T herefore, the growth 
composition appears to be shifting in favor of net exports thanks to the rising 
demand from the EU countries. This composition chan ge and the favorable 
developments in the terms of trade along with the m oderate course of consumer 
loans support the improvement in the current accoun t balance. Recent data indicate 
a marked improvement in the seasonally adjusted cur rent account balance. Thus, the 
current account balance in annual terms is expected  to improve further. 
9.  Among BTS indicators, export orders over the last t hree months have seen 
expectations grow increasingly optimistic since ear ly third quarter, while domestic 
orders have recovered recently after the weak cours e of the first three quarters. 
Moreover, the consumer confidence increased notably  amid lessening domestic 
uncertainty. Likewise, expectations for investment and employment continued to 
improve. Against this background, confidence and re venue channels are expected to 
boost domestic demand in the upcoming period.  10.  Non-farm unemployment remained flat in August due t o the falling labor force 
participation, while non-farm employment decreased.  By sectors, employment 
picked up slightly in services and construction but  declined in the industrial sector for 
the third period in a row. Thus, the average annual  non-farm employment growth 
equaled 3 percent in the January-August period. Hav ing trended upward for the first 
three quarters, industrial production is expected t o remain on the rise through the 
rest of the year. Survey indicators for industrial employment also point to a recovery 
in September and October. Accordingly, the fall in industrial employment is likely to 
be temporary. Given the economic outlook, the modes t growth in services and 
construction employment is expected to continue.  
11.  To sum up, domestic demand appears to follow a more  moderate course in the 
second half of the year, while external demand make s an increased contribution to 
growth. The recovery in European economy affects ex ternal demand positively, 
whereas geopolitical tensions pose a downside risk to external demand. Meanwhile, 
the reduced domestic uncertainty drives consumer co nfidence and expectations of 
investment and employment higher, which are expecte d to help to support the 
recovery of domestic demand over the upcoming perio d. Hence, aggregate demand 
conditions are likely to provide further support fo r disinflation. 
Monetary Policy and Risks  
12.  Annual loan growth continues at reasonable levels i n response to the tight monetary 
policy stance and macroprudential measures. Yet, lo an growth has seen some 
deceleration recently. Specifically, commercial loa ns denominated in foreign currency 
and consumer loans have lost significant momentum. The Committee expects loans 
to return to the moderate growth path amid normaliz ed financial conditions over the 
upcoming period. With respect to the composition of  loans, commercial loans 
continue to grow faster than consumer loans. This c omposition not only limits 
medium-term inflationary pressures, but also helps to improve the current account 
balance.  
13.  Indicators for the second half of the year point to  a moderate economic activity. 
Industrial production continued to grow in the thir d quarter as well after the first half 
of the year. In this period, the non-gold exports v olume index increased whereas the 
imports index fell. The rising demand in the Europe an economy affects Turkey’s 
exports positively while geopolitical developments put downward pressure on 
external demand. Both the recent recovery of the co nfidence index and the 
improving expectations for investment and employmen t are likely to bolster 
domestic demand. Accordingly, the Committee assesse s that the growth composition 
has shifted in favor of net exports. In addition to  this shift, the favorable 
developments in the terms of trade and the sluggish  course of consumer loans 
contribute to the improvement in the current accoun t balance. Given the recent 
notable improvement in the seasonally-adjusted curr ent account balance, the annual 
current account deficit is expected to narrow furth er.  14.  Energy price developments continue to affect inflat ion favorably. The negative 
impact of cumulative exchange rate developments sin ce the beginning of the year 
on the inflation outlook is partly offset by lower oil prices. Food prices, on the other 
hand, remain volatile mainly due to unprocessed foo d prices. The cumulative 
Turkish lira depreciation caused the annual core go ods inflation to rise and the core 
inflation trend to deteriorate slightly. Thus, cons idering the impact of the global 
market uncertainty on inflation expectations and th e volatility in energy and 
unprocessed food prices, the Committee stated that the tight liquidity stance will be 
maintained as long as deemed necessary. Future mone tary policy decisions will be 
conditional on the inflation outlook. Taking into a ccount inflation expectations, the 
pricing behavior and developments in other factors affecting inflation, the tight 
monetary policy stance will be maintained. 
15.  Uncertainties surrounding global monetary policies and concerns over global growth 
cause financial markets to remain volatile. Therefo re, portfolio flows to emerging 
economies follow a volatile pattern. Despite having  improved somewhat recently, 
risk premia and exchange rate volatilities remain h igh. The Committee stated that the 
measures announced by the CBRT within the context o f the “road map during the 
normalization of global monetary policies” boost th e resilience of the economy 
against global shocks. The current monetary policy stance continues to be tight 
against the inflation outlook, stabilizing for the FX liquidity, and supportive of 
financial stability. 
16.  In case the decline in loan growth rates becomes pe rmanent and exchange rates 
continue to face upward pressure over the upcoming period, in addition to 
preserving the tight monetary policy stance, the Co mmittee may take measures to 
support the Turkish lira and the loan growth by eas ing the conditions for the use of 
foreign currency denominated collateral. 
17.  Developments in the fiscal policy and tax adjustmen ts are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. T he baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal disc ipline will be maintained and there 
will be no unanticipated hikes in administered pric es. A revision of the monetary 
policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from 
this framework, and consequently have an adverse ef fect on the medium-term 
inflation outlook. 
18.  Sustained fiscal discipline has become a fundamenta l element in reducing the 
sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external  shocks in recent years. In the 
current environment of highly uncertain global mark ets, the value added from 
maintaining and further advancing these achievement s is significant. Any measure 
that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings 
deficit will support macroeconomic stability and co ntribute positively to social 
welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term gove rnment securities at low levels. 