   
 
No: 2015-48  
PRESS RELEASE  
18 August 2015 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Başçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çe tinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin,             
Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu.  
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to keep the short term interest rates 
constant at the following levels: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate at 10.75 percent, the interest rate on borrowing 
facilities provided for primary dealers via repo tr ansactions at 10.25 percent, and borrowing rate 
at 7.25 percent, 
b)  One-week repo rate at 7.5 percent, 
c)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing rate at 0 
percent, and lending rate at 12.25 percent. 
Loan growth continues at reasonable levels in respo nse to the tight monetary policy stance and 
macroprudential measures. The favorable development s in the terms of trade and the moderate course 
of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance. External demand 
remains weak, while domestic demand contributes to growth moderately. The Committee assesses that 
the implementation of the announced structural refo rms would contribute to the potential growth 
significantly. 
Processed food and energy price developments affect  inflation favorably in the short run, while exchan ge 
rate movements delay the improvement in the core in dicators. Considering this delay and taking into 
account the uncertainty in domestic and global mark ets and the volatility in energy and food prices, t he 
Committee decided to implement a tighter liquidity policy as long as deemed necessary. Moreover, the 
Committee also discussed the roadmap to be implemen ted before and after global monetary policy 
normalization and decided to publish a strategy doc ument with today’s policy statement.      
Future monetary policy decisions will be conditiona l on the improvements in the inflation outlook. 
Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation will be monitored clo sely 
and the cautious monetary policy stance will be mai ntained, by keeping a flat yield curve, until there  is a 
significant improvement in the inflation outlook. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five working days. 
 
