   
 
No: 2015-47  
PRESS RELEASE  
July 30 2015 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 23 July 2015 
Inflation Developments 
1.  In June, consumer prices decreased by 0.51 percent,  bringing annual consumer 
inflation down by about 0.9 points to 7.20 percent.  With the ongoing correction in 
food prices, the decline in annual food inflation b ecame more pronounced. Changes 
in crude oil prices drove energy inflation lower, y et the depreciation of Turkish lira 
constrained the disinflation. Core goods inflation was slightly up due to exchange 
rate effects while services inflation remained elev ated. Thus, both the annual 
inflation and the underlying trend of core inflatio n indicators followed a flat course.   
2.  Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages  was down by 3.54 points in 
June to 9.28 percent. This decline was largely caus ed by unprocessed food prices, 
while annual processed food inflation continued to slow. May’s fresh fruit and 
vegetable-driven drop in seasonally-adjusted unproc essed food prices continued 
into this period at a stronger pace thanks to incre ased supply. However, red meat 
prices remained on the rise, affecting inflation ne gatively in associated categories 
such as processed food and catering services.  
3.  After an upsurge since February, energy prices decr eased by 0.17 percent in June, 
bringing annual energy inflation down by 0.6 points  to 2.78 percent. The fall in 
energy prices was mostly attributed to bottled gas and fuel prices, while indicators 
for July point to a continued decrease in energy pr ices.  
4.  Prices of services were up 0.88 percent in June whi le annual services inflation 
remained unchanged at 8.85 percent, mostly due to r estaurants-hotels and other 
services. Annual inflation in rents and transport, on the other hand, decreased. 
Despite the significant correction in food prices o ver the past two months, annual 
restaurants-hotels inflation remained on the rise a mid the ongoing upsurge in red 
meat prices. Meanwhile, annual inflation in the sub group of other services increased 
due to rising prices of package holidays. As a resu lt, underlying trend of services 
inflation remained flat at an elevated level.  
 5.  Annual core goods inflation increased by 0.09 point s to 5.97 percent in June. Annual 
inflation was up in durable goods due to base effec ts but down in other main 
categories. The substantial April-May price hikes w ere replaced by a slowdown in 
June across categories where exchange rate pass-thr ough to prices is relatively 
faster, such as home appliances and automobiles. Pr ices of automobiles increased 
only modestly, while prices of furniture and electr ic/nonelectric appliances went 
down. On the other hand, core goods excluding cloth ing and durable goods 
continued to reflect the effects of cumulative depr eciation in the Turkish lira. Hence, 
underlying trend of core goods inflation registered  a small increase in June.  
Factors Affecting Inflation 
6.  Industrial production declined by 2 percent in May on a monthly basis. This fall 
stemmed mainly from the production loss led by stri kes in the automotive sector. 
The lowering effect on industrial production of the  contraction in the production of 
vehicles is expected to be compensated for in the c oming months. On a quarterly 
basis, the production level in the April-May period  is 1 percent higher than the 
average production in the previous quarter. Assessi ng the PMI and BTS data 
together, a strong rebound is not expected in indus trial production in the second 
quarter. 
7.  Data on the expenditure side suggest that productio n and imports of consumption 
goods increased in the April-May period compared to  the average of the previous 
quarter. Domestic sales of home appliances recorded  an uptick in this period. 
Likewise, sales of automobiles in the second quarte r stood above the first-quarter 
average. Consumer confidence, on the other hand, co ntinued to weaken due to 
geopolitical risks and uncertainties in global mark ets. Among investment indicators, 
production and imports of machinery-equipment poste d a decline in the April-May 
period in comparison to the average of the previous  quarter. Production and 
imports of mineral products, among the indicators f or construction investment, 
registered an increase in the same period. Construc tion employment remained flat 
in April. Investment tendency maintained its sluggi sh course in the second quarter 
of 2015. Accordingly, domestic private demand is ex pected to contribute to growth 
moderately in the second quarter. 
8.  Following the contraction in the first quarter, the  export quantity index excluding 
gold increased at a modest rate in the April-May pe riod compared to the previous 
quarter, while the import quantity index excluding gold maintained its upward 
trend. This suggests that the contribution of exter nal demand to growth may be 
limited in the second quarter. The weak course of t he global economy and the 
ongoing geopolitical developments put a cap on expo rt growth. On the other hand, 
the favorable developments in the terms of trade an d the moderate course of 
consumer loans continue to contribute to the improv ement in the current account 
balance. 
9.  In April 2015, total and non-farm unemployment rate s fell by 0.1 and 0.2 points, 
respectively. Employment in non-farm sectors rose w hile the increase in labor force  was limited, leading to a decline in the unemployme nt rate. Employment in the 
industrial and services sectors rose, while constru ction employment fell in this 
period. Since the last quarter of 2014, non-farm em ployment growth has been 
driven by the services sector, while the industrial  and construction employment 
have fluctuated around a flat trend. The industrial  production and survey indicators 
suggest that the contribution of industrial sector to employment will be limited also 
in the upcoming period. Services employment is anti cipated to grow at a slower 
pace in the upcoming period owing also to the stagn ant tourism sector. Accordingly, 
unemployment is not expected to record a notable de cline in the rest of the year. 
The current course of economic activity and the wea kening investment tendency 
pose downside risks to employment.  
10.  In sum, data on the second quarter of 2015 suggest a mild course in economic 
activity. External demand remains weak while domest ic demand contributes to 
growth moderately. Meanwhile, geopolitical risks an d uncertainties in global 
markets besides the weak course of consumer and inv estor confidence pose some 
risks to growth in the upcoming period 
Monetary Policy and Risks  
11.  The Committee assessed the medium-term projections to be presented in the July 
Inflation Report. Inflation in the second quarter p roved close to the forecasts of the 
April Inflation Report, while core inflation stood above the projections. In this 
period, the fall in food inflation became the main driver of the improvement in 
inflation, while core inflation rose mostly because  of the exchange rate effects. 
Analyzing the assumptions and external conditions t hat underlie the inflation 
forecasts, the end-2015 inflation forecast is revis ed slightly upwards in view of the 
developments in import and food prices besides the rise in core inflation driven by 
the exchange rate. The Committee assesses that that  the partial recovery in food 
prices accompanied by the cautious monetary policy will limit the deterioration in 
the inflation outlook and inflation will reach the target in the medium term.  
12.  Unprocessed food inflation had been quite unfavorab le in the first quarter, leading 
inflation to post high figures. However, recently t here has been a notable correction 
in food prices, which has affected inflation favora bly. Similarly, the recent decline in 
oil prices supports disinflation. On the other hand , exchange rate movements have 
been especially influential in the core goods group , delaying the recovery in the core 
inflation trend. This delay, combined with the unce rtainty in global markets and 
volatility in energy and food prices, makes it nece ssary to maintain the cautious 
stance in monetary policy. The Committee has theref ore decided to keep the 
interest rates at current levels.  
13.  Future monetary policy decisions will be conditiona l on the pace of improvements in 
the inflation outlook. Inflation expectations, pric ing behaviors and other factors 
affecting inflation will be monitored closely and t he cautious monetary policy stance 
will be maintained by keeping the yield curve flat,  until there is a significant  improvement in the inflation outlook.  Besides the cautious monetary stance, 
additional foreign exchange liquidity measures may be adopted, if exchange rate 
movements continue to delay the fall in inflation.     
14.  Loan growth continues at reasonable levels in respo nse to the tight monetary policy 
stance and macroprudential measures. Commercial loa ns have recently been 
following a robust course of growth, while consumer  loans lost pace due to the 
items excluding housing. Additionally, commercial l oans grow faster than consumer 
loans in line with the desired loan composition. Ow ing also to the recent partial 
tightening in financial conditions, total credit gr owth is expected to slow somewhat 
in the second half of the year. This loan outlook n ot only limits medium-term 
inflationary pressures, but also contributes to the  improvement in the current 
account balance. 
15.  External demand remains weak while domestic demand contributes to growth 
moderately. Although the recovery in the European e conomy affects the external 
demand positively, ongoing geopolitical development s and the slowdown in global 
trade restrict the export growth. Meanwhile, cumula tive energy imports will 
continue to decline if the current low levels of oi l prices are maintained. As a result, 
favorable developments in the terms of trade and th e mild course of consumer 
loans support the recovery in the current account b alance, yet the relatively weak 
export outlook limits this recovery. Domestic deman d, on the other hand, exhibits a 
mild increase driven mainly by consumption. Meanwhi le, the weak course of 
confidence indices coupled with domestic and extern al uncertainties are the risk 
factors that may restrict the contribution of the f inal private demand to growth. In 
this context, it is projected that the recovery in economic activity will be gradual, 
and the aggregate demand conditions will continue t o support disinflation. 
16.  Risks to global markets remain significant. Reduced  predictability of the global 
economy and increased uncertainties amid the diverg ence among the monetary 
policies of advanced economies cause global markets  to remain highly data-
sensitive. Against this background, the volatility in the risk appetite and capital flows 
continues. The Committee underlined that, besides c yclical policies to stabilize 
capital flows, structural measures to enhance the r esilience of the financial system 
are important as well. Accordingly, recent measures  implemented to support the FX 
liquidity, core liabilities, and long-term borrowin g have enhanced the resilience of 
the economy against global shocks. The Committee ha s stated that additional 
measures along these lines may be adopted if deemed  necessary. 
17.  Following the global crisis, especially during the exit process of the US monetary 
policy, long-term rates in emerging economies have grown excessively sensitive to 
global monetary policies. The wide interest rate co rridor and the tight liquidity 
policy implemented by the CBRT increased the resili ence of our economy against 
global shocks during this period. In the upcoming p eriod, following the start of 
normalization of global monetary policies, volatili ty in long-term interest rates may  decline permanently thanks to forward guidance poli cies. According to this baseline 
scenario, the need for a wide interest rate corrido r in our country may diminish over 
time.  In that case, the operational framework of t he CBRT’s interest rate policy may 
be simplified gradually.  Members of the Committee asked the technical 
departments to complete the preparations in this di rection and to present them in 
August meeting. 
18.  Developments in the fiscal policy and tax adjustmen ts are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. T he baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal disc ipline will be maintained and 
there will be no unanticipated hikes on administere d prices. A revision of the 
monetary policy stance may be considered, should th e fiscal policy deviate 
significantly from this framework, and consequently  have an adverse effect on the 
medium-term inflation outlook. 
19.  Sustained fiscal discipline has become a fundamenta l element in reducing the 
sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external  shocks in recent years. In the 
current environment of highly uncertain global mark ets, the value added from 
maintaining and further advancing these achievement s is significant. Any measure 
that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings 
deficit will support macroeconomic stability and co ntribute positively to social 
welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term gove rnment securities at low levels. 