   
 
No: 2015-55  
PRESS RELEASE  
22 September 2015 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Başçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çe tinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin,             
Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu.  
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to keep the short term interest rates 
constant at the following levels: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate at 10.75 percent, and borrowing rate at 7.25 
percent, 
b)  One-week repo rate at 7.5 percent, 
c)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing rate at 0 
percent, and lending rate at 12.25 percent. 
Loan growth continues at reasonable levels in respo nse to the tight monetary policy stance and 
macroprudential measures. The favorable development s in the terms of trade and the moderate course 
of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance. External demand 
remained weak in the first half of the year, while domestic demand contributed to growth moderately. 
The composition of growth is expected to shift grad ually towards net exports in upcoming periods with 
the support of rising demand from the European Unio n economies. The Committee assesses that the 
implementation of the announced structural reforms would contribute to the potential growth 
significantly. 
Energy price developments affect inflation favorabl y, while exchange rate movements delay the 
improvement in the core indicators. Considering the  impact of the uncertainty in domestic and global 
markets on inflation expectations and taking into a ccount the volatility in energy and food prices, th e 
Committee decided to maintain the tight liquidity s tance as long as deemed necessary. Moreover, the 
Committee assessed the measures already implemented  and to be implemented in the context of the 
“road map during the normalization of global moneta ry policies”.  
Future monetary policy decisions will be conditiona l on the improvements in the inflation outlook. 
Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation will be monitored clo sely 
and the cautious monetary policy stance will be mai ntained, by keeping a flat yield curve, until there  is a 
significant improvement in the inflation outlook. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five working days. 
 
