   
 
  No: 201 5-22 
PRESS RELEASE  
24 March 2015 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING   
Meeting Date : 17 Mar ch 2015       
Inflation Developments   
1. In February, consumer prices increased by 0.71 percent and annual inflation rose by 
0.31 points to 7.55 percent. This increase was mainly driven by food prices. The 
decline in the annual inflation of non -food consumer prices has continued. 
Underlying infla tion rose in services but fell in core goods. Overall , core inflation 
indicators continued to improve.  
 
2. Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages surged by 2.73 points to 13.70 
percent amid developments in unprocessed food prices. This period was marked by 
escalating vegetable prices caused by adverse weather conditions and supply -related 
upsurge s in meat prices. On the other hand, despite the receding annual inflation in 
processed food prices, the monthly trend of increase remained elevated in this 
subcategory. Indicators for March signal that the annual food inflation will remain 
high.  
 
3. Annual energy inflation remained modest with a growth rate of -1.92 percent despite 
rising fuel prices and water tariffs. Yet, energy prices are expected to have a less 
constraining  effect on  annual consumer inflation due to soaring prices of fuel and 
bottled gas amid the Turkish lira depreciation in March.  
 
4. Prices of services were up by 0.68 percent in February while annual services inflation 
fell by 0.10 poin ts to 8.63 percent. In this period, changes in food and oil prices as 
well as exchange rates exerted  cost pressures on prices of services. Accordingly, the 
monthly rate of increase in catering prices accelerated due to rising food prices. 
Moreover, having declined since November, prices of transport services picked up 
slightly amid higher fuel prices while prices of some items sensitive to exchange rates 
surged notably. As a result, services inflation remained elevated throughout 
February.  
  
5. Annual core good s inflation decreased by 1.78 points to 6.79 percent in February. 
Annual inflation was down across all main categories, particularly in durable goods. 
The decline in annual core goods inflation was largely driven by base effects . 
Meanwhile, the monthly rate of increase in prices of core goods excluding clothing 
reflected the pass -through  of the Turkish lira depreciation , although the recent 
weakening of domestic demand conditions has partially balanced off the exchange 
rate-driven cost pressu res. Accordingly, the underlying trend of core goods inflation 
fell to a modest level in February.  
 
6. To sum up, (core) inflation indicators excluding energy and food continued to decline 
in February. Yet, the current course of food prices and the exchange r ate 
developments are the key risk factors regarding  the inflation outlook.    
 
Factors Affecting Inflation  
7. Industrial production recorded a monthly decline of 1.4 percent in January. This was 
largely attributed to the slow down  in domestic demand growth and the weakening 
external demand as well as to the setbacks in the supply chain and construction 
activities caused by January’s adverse weather conditions. February’s PMI and 
Business Tendency Survey  (BTS) data suggest that  the weak course of  industrial 
production has continued lately.  
 
8. Data on the expenditure side  suggest  that demand conditions do not yet reveal a 
significant recovery . In January, the production of consumer goods was lower than 
the previous quarter’s average, while the impor ts of consumer goods were on the 
rise. In this period, domestic sales of home appliances dropped. Similarly, sales of 
automobiles were down from the fourth -quarter average during  the January -
February  period . Consumer confidence continued to weaken amid unc ertainty over 
global markets. Among indicators for investments, the production and imports of 
machinery -equipment fell in January from the previous quarter’s average. The B TS 
investment tendency indicator, which recorded a recovery over the second half of 
2014 , has not gained a steady footing as of the first quarter  of 2015. Among variables 
related to construction investments, the production of minerals declined whereas 
the imports of minerals increased. After an upsurge starting in the second half of 
2014,  construction employment flattened in December. In sum, recent indicators 
suggest that private domestic demand has contribute d moderately to growth albeit 
at a slower pace in the first quarter of 2015.  
 
9. According to the real measures of e xternal trade indicators , the rebalancing process 
has not shown a notable improvement in January. During this period , non -gold 
exports were weaker than their fourth -quarter average, while non -gold imports were 
flat. Th e slowdown in exports was mostly due to the weak  growth across Turkey’s  major trading partners. However, the developments in the terms of trade and the 
moderate course of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current 
account balance. Thus, the current account balance is expected to  improve fur ther 
throughout 2015.  
 
10. In December 2014, both total and nonfarm unemployment decreased. Although 
there was no robust employment growth in this period, the flat labor participation 
rate helped to bring unemployment rates down. Across nonfarm sectors, servic es 
employment increased whereas industrial employment recorded a slight fall. The 
PMI and BTS survey indicators that reflect actual and expected employment figures 
for firms were down in February 2015. Other indicators for the labor market point to 
no sign ificant recovery in employment as of the first quarter of 2015.  
 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
11. The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) stated that economic activity lost 
some momentum in the first quarter of the year. This slowdown was attributed to 
the weak external demand, the volatile financial markets and adverse weather 
conditions. As it is too early at this point to distinguish  the negative impact of 
weather conditions, the Committee suggested monitoring the data closely for a while  
before makin g a more definitive assessment  regarding  the underlying trend of 
economic activity.  
 
12. The ongoing cautious monetary policy along with prudent fiscal and macroprudential 
policies are having a favorable impact on inflation, especially inflation excluding 
ener gy and food (core inflation indicators). The moderate course of aggregate 
demand conditions and the continued downtrend in import prices support 
disinflation as of the first quarter. In the short run, the annual rate of increase in core 
indicators is likel y to decline further thanks to base effects. However, elevated food 
prices and the recent exchange rate movements will cause inflation to hover above 
the level indicated in the January Inflation Report for some time.  
 
13. Global markets continue to follow a volatile course. The reduced predictability 
regarding global economy, the low inflation rates across advanced economies , and 
the growing uncertainty along with the decoupling of monetary policies  cause global 
markets to remain highly  data -sensitive. As a result,  the risk appetite and capital 
flows continue to be volatile . The Committee pointed out that the measures the 
CBRT has recently taken in terms of foreign ex change liquidity and prudent 
borrowing are  to minimize mac ro financial risks arising from the uncertainty in global 
financial markets and global economic activity.  
  14. In sum, the uncertainty in global markets and elevated food prices necessitates 
maintaining the cautious stance in monetary policy. Accordingly, the  Committee 
decided to keep the interest rates at current levels.  
 
15. Future monetary policy decisions will be conditional on the improvements in the 
inflation outlook. Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors that 
affect inflation will be mo nitored closely and the cautious monetary policy stance will 
be maintained, by keeping a flat yield curve, until there is a significant improvement 
in the inflation outlook.  
 
16. Developments on the fiscal policy and tax adjustments are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained and there 
will be no unanticipated hikes on administered prices. A revision of the monetary 
policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from 
this framework, and consequently, have an adverse effect on the medium -term 
inflation outlook.  
 
17. The Committee assessed that the implementation of the announced structural 
reforms would contribute significantly to potential growth over the medium to long 
term. Any measure that would  strengthen stability and confidence, ensure the 
sustainability of the fiscal discipline , and reduce the savings deficit will support 
macroeconomi c stability and contribute positively to social welfare by keeping 
interest rates at low levels.  