   
 
No: 2015-36  
PRESS RELEASE  
20 May 2015 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Başçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çe tinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin,             
Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet Yörükoğlu.  
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to keep the short term interest rates 
constant at the following levels: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate at 10.75 percent, the interest rate on borrowing 
facilities provided for primary dealers via repo tr ansactions at 10.25 percent, and borrowing rate 
at 7.25 percent, 
b)  One-week repo rate at 7.5 percent, 
c)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing rate at 0 
percent, and lending rate at 12.25 percent. 
Loan growth continues at reasonable levels in respo nse to the tight monetary policy stance and 
macroprudential measures. The favorable development s in the terms of trade and the moderate course 
of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance. External demand 
remains weak, while domestic demand contributes to growth moderately. The Committee assesses that 
the implementation of the announced structural refo rms would contribute to the potential growth 
significantly. 
The ongoing cautious monetary policy along with pru dent fiscal and macroprudential policies continue t o 
have a favorable impact on inflation, especially in flation excluding energy and food (core inflation 
indicators). However, recently elevated volatility in the exchange rates has limited the improvement i n 
the core inflation, as stated in the Inflation Repo rt. This, combined with the uncertainty in global m arkets 
and volatility in energy and food prices, makes it necessary to maintain the cautious stance in moneta ry 
policy. Accordingly, the Committee has decided to k eep the interest rates at current levels.  
Future monetary policy decisions will be conditiona l on the improvements in the inflation outlook. 
Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation will be monitored clo sely 
and the cautious monetary policy stance will be mai ntained, by keeping a flat yield curve, until there  is a 
significant improvement in the inflation outlook. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five working days. 
 
