   
 
No: 2016-13  
PRESS RELEASE  
March 31 st , 2016 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 24 March 2016 
Inflation Developments 
1.  In February, consumer prices edged down by 0.02 per cent, and annual inflation 
dropped by 0.80 points to 8.78 percent. The fall in  inflation stemmed from 
unprocessed food and energy prices. Lagged effects of the exchange rate weakened 
further in this period. Annual inflation in core in dicators recorded a slight increase, 
while the underlying trend continued to improve to a limited extent. 
2.  Annual inflation in the food and non-alcoholic beve rages group fell by 2.86 points to 
8.83 percent. This was mainly driven by unprocessed  food prices, the annual 
inflation of which decreased to 8.89 percent due to  vegetable prices. On the 
processed food front, annual inflation sustained th e uptrend amid the price 
developments in the bread-cereals group and hit 8.7 9 percent. Meanwhile, leading 
indicators suggest a notable decline in food inflat ion in March as well. 
3.  On the energy front, prices fell by 0.56 percent du e mainly to fuel prices, and annual 
inflation decreased to 2.85 percent. Annual energy inflation is envisaged to fall 
further due to the base effect in March.  
4.  Prices of services increased by 0.59 percent, and a nnual services inflation receded to 
9.06 percent in February. Annual inflation decrease d in the communication and 
restaurants-hotels groups, but increased in other s ubgroups. Annual inflation in the 
rent group hit the highest level of the last six ye ars. The high course of inflation 
expectations and wage developments as well as lagge d exchange rate pass-through 
effects delay the fall in services inflation. 
5.  Annual core goods inflation edged up by 0.27 points  to 10.37 percent in February. 
Annual inflation registered an increase across all subgroups. Annual inflation of 
durable consumption goods maintained high levels wi th 12 percent, and that of the 
clothing group hit 9.80 percent. Upward trend in co re goods excluding clothing and 
durable goods continued. On the other hand, seasona lly-adjusted indicators suggest 
 a slowdown in the underlying trend of core goods in flation due to the dwindling 
effects of the cumulative depreciation in the Turki sh lira. 
6.  In sum, food and energy prices have affected inflat ion favorably, while other cost 
factors have limited the improvement in the core in flation trend recently. 
Factors Affecting Inflation  
7.  January industrial production increased by 1 percen t month-on-month in seasonally 
adjusted terms, which was 1.3 percent above the pre vious quarter. Thus, the growth 
trend of 2015 was preserved in January. Survey indi cators and external trade data 
suggest a similar pace of growth in February.  
8.  Data on the expenditure side suggest a modest cours e of private demand growth in 
the first quarter of 2016. The production of consum er goods was higher than the 
previous quarter's average in January. In addition,  the sales of home appliances and 
automobiles picked up in February after a sluggish January. The uptrend across 
these industries is likely to continue into March. Survey-based indices for domestic 
orders also point to a continued moderate rise in d omestic demand. Among 
indicators of investment, the production and import s of capital goods posted a small 
decline in January; yet the decline was mostly attr ibuted to the vehicle industry and 
expected to be short-lived. The production of non-m etallic minerals and the sales of 
heavy commercial vehicles, which are indicators for  construction investments, 
registered a drop caused partly by adverse weather conditions. Meanwhile, the 
consumer confidence indices and the investment sent iment reveal that the 
contribution of the confidence channel to domestic demand is still limited. Against 
this background, private demand is expected to rise  modestly in the first quarter of 
2016. 
9.  Favorable developments in the terms of trade accomp anied by the moderate course 
of consumer loans support the recovery in the curre nt account balance. The growing 
EU demand continues to support exports. Turkish exp orters’ flexibility in shifting 
between markets contains the downside risks resulti ng from geopolitical tensions. 
Thus, amid an ongoing EU demand growth, low commodi ty prices and sustained 
macroprudential policies, the current account balan ce is likely to improve further.  
10.  Unemployment rates were down month-on-month in Dece mber 2015, largely due 
to growing nonfarm employment and lower labor force  participation. Across sub-
sectors, the services provided the largest contribu tion to nonfarm employment 
growth, while construction employment also increase d. Industrial employment, on 
the other hand, edged down for the second month in a row in December. 
Production and survey indicators suggest that emplo yment growth will maintain its 
moderate course in the short term. Accordingly, une mployment rates are expected 
to remain flat in the first quarter of 2016. 
11.  In conclusion, recent indicators reveal that the ec onomy continues to grow steadily 
as of the first quarter of 2016. Although geopoliti cal tensions pose a downside risk,  the EU recovery affects external demand favorably. Wage increases and low oil 
prices support domestic demand through the income c hannel. Overall, economic 
activity remains on a moderate growth path. 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
12.  Annual loan growth continues at reasonable levels i n response to the tight monetary 
policy stance and macroprudential measures. The mod est course of loans can be 
attributed to both supply and demand side factors. Adjustments in risk weights and 
minimum wages are considered to support loan growth  in the forthcoming period 
through the loan supply and household income channe ls. Yet, indicators for the loan 
market still point to tight financial conditions, n otwithstanding the recent fall in 
market rates and risk premiums. Therefore, loan gro wth rates are unlikely to post a 
significant recovery in the short run. With respect  to the composition of loans, 
commercial loans continue to grow faster than consu mer loans. Such a composition 
not only limits medium-term inflationary pressures but also supports the 
improvement in the current account balance. 
13.  Recent data indicate that domestic demand continues  to contribute to growth 
modestly albeit at a lesser extent compared to prev ious quarters. Ongoing tightness 
in financial conditions weighs on loan and domestic  demand growth, whereas 
energy prices and wage developments provide support  to domestic demand 
through the income channel. On the foreign demand f ront, geopolitical 
developments pose a downside risk, yet the economic  recovery in Europe and the 
flexibility of exporters in shifting between market s offset this risk, which is 
conducive for both economic growth and rebalancing prospects. Moreover, 
improvements in the terms of trade mainly led by th e cumulative fall in commodity 
prices, coupled with the modest course of consumer loans, support the 
improvement in the current account balance. On the other hand, the Committee 
noted that the recent developments in services expo rts pose downside risks on 
demand, employment, and the current account balance . Although this risk is not 
imminent at the moment, the developments should be monitored closely to have a 
clearer understanding of the implications for the m edium-term outlook. Overall, the 
monetary policy stance is based on an outlook where  economic activity will remain 
on a moderate growth path while the current account  deficit will narrow further, 
albeit at a slower pace. 
14.  The Committee assesses that the effective use of th e policy tools announced in the 
road map of August 2015 bolster the resilience of t he economy against global 
shocks. Excessive volatility in both credit and exc hange rates has been dampened 
after the adoption of these new instruments. In fac t, the relative volatility of the 
Turkish lira has decreased notably since September compared to other emerging 
market currencies.  This process is supported by the gradually falling demand for 
foreign exchange amid the improving current account  balance and lower energy 
prices. Meanwhile, foreign currency liquidity instr uments are used to stabilize the  value of the Turkish lira. All these developments r educe the need for a wide interest 
rate corridor to some degree. 
15.  Another factor that has recently reduced the need f or a wide interest rate corridor is 
the global economic and financial developments. Mou nting prospects that global 
economic recovery will be slow have recently foster ed the expectations of a 
prolonged period of low interest rates across advan ced economies. Accordingly, 
capital flows into emerging economies increased whi le risk premiums fell 
significantly. 
16.  In sum, global volatility has recently waned to som e extent and the effective use of 
the policy instruments laid out in the road map of August 2015 have reduced the 
need for a wide interest rate corridor. In this res pect, the Committee decided to 
take a measured step towards simplification by lowe ring the overnight lending rate 
by 25 basis points. 
17.  However, improvement in the underlying core inflati on trend remains limited, 
necessitating the maintenance of a tight liquidity stance. Although recent 
developments regarding imported input costs have ea sed the upside risks on the 
inflation outlook, the improvement in core inflatio n is still limited. Wage 
developments and the lagged pass-through effects of  cumulative exchange rate 
movements restrain the improvement in the underlyin g trend of inflation. Annual 
inflation in food prices, which declined significan tly in February, is likely to post 
another sharp fall in March. Yet, this will be main ly due to prices of vegetables, 
suggesting that food prices might remain volatile i n the upcoming period. Against 
this background, the Committee stated that the curr ent tight liquidity stance should 
be maintained in order to ensure that the recently observed disinflation process is 
long lasting. 
18.  Future monetary policy decisions will be conditiona l on the inflation outlook.  Taking 
into account inflation expectations, the pricing be havior and the course of other 
factors affecting inflation, the tight monetary pol icy stance will be maintained. 
Moreover, global and domestic volatilities will be monitored closely and necessary 
measures will be undertaken in the foreign exchange  and Turkish lira markets. In 
sum, the policy stance will remain tight against th e inflation outlook, stabilizing for 
the FX liquidity and supportive of the financial st ability. 
19.  Developments in the fiscal policy and tax adjustmen ts are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. T he baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal disc ipline will be maintained and 
there will be no unanticipated hikes in administere d prices. A revision of the 
monetary policy stance may be considered, should th e fiscal policy deviate 
significantly from this framework, and consequently  have an adverse effect on the 
medium-term inflation outlook.  20.  Sustained fiscal discipline has become a fundamenta l element in reducing the 
sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external  shocks in recent years. In the 
current environment of highly uncertain global mark ets, the value added from 
maintaining and further advancing these achievement s is significant. Any measure 
that would ensure the sustainability of fiscal disc ipline and reduce the savings deficit 
will support macroeconomic stability and contribute  positively to social welfare by 
keeping interest rates of long-term government secu rities at low levels. 
 
 