   
 
No: 2016-32  
PRESS RELEASE  
26 July 2016 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 19 July 2016 
Inflation Developments 
1.  In June, consumer prices increased by 0.47 percent,  and annual inflation went up by 
1.06 points to 7.64 percent. In this period, food i nflation posted a notable rise due to 
the correction in unprocessed food prices and the b ase effect. Annual inflation in 
core indicators registered a decline, while the und erlying trends remained virtually 
unchanged. 
2.  As projected in the Summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting in the 
previous month, annual inflation in food and non-al coholic beverages climbed to 6.63 
percent in June due to unprocessed food prices. The  prices of fresh fruits and 
vegetables in unprocessed food category increased n otably. Hence, annual inflation 
in unprocessed food prices increased by around 9 po ints to 4.62 percent given the 
low base effect. On the other hand, processed food inflation posted the lowest 
monthly rate of increase over the last 3 years and annual inflation in this category 
declined to 8.38 percent. Preliminary indicators in  July point out that annual food 
inflation may continue to rise due to unprocessed f ood prices. On the energy front, 
prices increased by 0.50 percent in line with the i nternational oil prices, and annual 
inflation hit 2.33 percent. 
3.  Prices of services increased by 0.42 percent, and t he annual services inflation 
decreased by 0.5 points to 8.25 percent in June. Pr ices of restaurants and hotels, 
which have been decelerating in the last couple of months, continued to slow down 
in June amid prices of accommodation services. Wani ng cumulative effects of the 
Turkish lira depreciation and the favorable course of other services supported the 
slowdown in the services inflation. Accordingly, th e underlying trend of services 
inflation recorded an improvement in June. On the o ther hand, rents continued with 
the high-rated increases of the previous two months  and recorded an annual 
inflation of 8.83 percent. 
4.  Annual core goods inflation increased by 0.31 point s to 9.13 percent in June. Annual 
inflation posted a rise in durable goods, but remai ned flat in other subcategories. 
 Prices of durable goods displayed an unfavorable ou tlook mainly due to the 
depreciation of the Turkish lira in May. Prices in the automotive sector, which enjoys 
relatively robust sales in the domestic market, dis played an upsurge in June. 
Meanwhile, the labor-intensive furniture sector con tinued to see price increases, 
albeit at a decelerating pace. Accordingly, the und erlying core goods inflation 
increased slightly. Amid the decelerating cumulativ e exchange rate effects, annual 
core goods inflation is expected to slow down in th e remainder of the year. 
5.  In sum, consumer inflation increased in June mainly  owing to the unprocessed food 
prices. Core inflation indicators continued to decl ine, albeit at a limited pace. The 
price hikes to tobacco products in July will pose u pward pressure on consumer 
inflation. The Committee highlighted that inflation  may register an upsurge in the 
short term on account of the developments in unproc essed food and tobacco prices. 
Meanwhile, core inflation is expected to sustain it s gradual downtrend. 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
6.  Data for the second quarter of 2016 indicate an ong oing yet slowing uptrend in 
economic activity. Adjusted for seasonal and calend ar effects, the industrial 
production index increased by 1.6 percent month-on- month in May; however, the 
sluggish course in April caused production to see a  quarterly fall of 0.4 percent during 
April-May period. Current indicators for June sugge st that industrial production may 
follow a more moderate path compared to May. Survey  indicators on output and 
orders were down in June, while automobile manufact uring recorded a small drop. 
7.  Data on the spending side point to a modest course in final domestic demand. The 
production of consumer goods remained horizontal du ring April-May period, 
whereas the imports thereof declined. A similar pat tern was observed in the 
production and imports of investment goods. Meanwhi le, sales of automobiles and 
commercial vehicles remained on the rise in the sec ond quarter. Firms’ investment 
demand was relatively weak in the second quarter. I n the April-May period, the non-
gold export quantity index was up only slightly fro m the first quarter, while the non-
gold import quantity index posted a fall. 
8.  Favorable developments in the terms of trade accomp anied by the moderate course 
of consumer loans support the recovery in the curre nt account balance. Despite 
heightened geopolitical risks, exports to the Europ ean Union countries continue to 
grow at an accelerated pace in the recent period. I n this regard, Turkey’s high 
market-shifting flexibility supports exports. Yet, the possible spillovers of falling 
tourism revenues on the current account deficit may  be felt more markedly by the 
summer months. Meanwhile, commodity prices are also  expected to become 
gradually less supportive of the current account de ficit in coming months. 
9.  Seasonally adjusted unemployment rates remained unc hanged month-on-month in 
April. In this period, non-farm employment continue d to grow, while the rising 
participation rate restricted the decline in unempl oyment rates. The upsurge in  construction employment was interrupted, while indu strial employment recovered 
back to 2015 levels after falling in the first few months. Services employment 
continues to expand, albeit at a slower pace than i n March. The employment growth 
in services continues to be driven by public admini stration and community services. 
In the light of leading indicators, employment is e xpected to remain on a modest 
track in the short term. Yet, the data by the Socia l Security Institution indicate that 
the stagnant tourism sector has started to have spi llovers on employment. 
10.  To sum up, current indicators suggest that the econ omy continues to grow at a 
moderate and steady pace. The income channel suppor ts domestic demand through 
wage increases. Although geopolitical developments pose persisting downside risks, 
the growing demand from European Union countries co ntinues to have favorable 
effects on exports, and thus production. However, t he ongoing slump in the tourism 
sector poses a downside risk to economic activity a nd the current account balance. 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
11.  The Committee evaluated the medium-term projections  to be published in the July 
Inflation Report. In the second quarter of the year , inflation increased in line with the 
projections of the April Inflation Report mainly du e to unprocessed food and energy 
prices, but went down across core items. Even thoug h inflation is projected to rise in 
the short term, core inflation is expected to settl e on a milder track across the year. 
The recent hikes in unprocessed food prices and the  tobacco price adjustments will 
cause an upsurge in July inflation. Yet, food price s may see a downward correction in 
the upcoming periods. Owing to the measures taken b y the Food and Agricultural 
Product Markets Monitoring Committee (Food Committe e) accompanied by the 
seasonal decline in food demand caused by the touri sm sector, the year-end food 
price inflation is expected to prove lower compared  to the previous reporting period. 
In addition, owing to the expected deceleration in economic activity in the short 
term, core inflation is anticipated to exhibit a mi lder course compared to the 
previous reporting period across the year. Meanwhil e, the minimum wage hike is 
estimated to have a limited effect on core inflatio n on the back of state support. 
Given the forecast assumptions and external conditi ons, inflation forecasts for the 
upcoming period were left unchanged from the previo us Inflation Report. 
12.  Financial conditions continue to be tight despite t he recent rise in the global risk 
appetite, which slightly eased conditions. Financia l conditions are likely to remain 
tight in the short term owing to domestic developme nts and weaker capital flows. 
Accordingly, loan growth rates are not expected to recover notably. The moderate 
course of loans is driven not only by demand but al so by the supply-side factors. 
Recent surveys show that loan standards did not dis play any easing. Domestic 
developments have recently led to fluctuations in m arkets. Liquidity measures taken 
by the Committee have partially limited the volatil ity in markets. It is projected that 
the effects of the fluctuations in markets will pro ve temporary and Turkey will sustain 
its resilience through its sound economic fundament als. On the other hand, to  balance the short-term effects of the tightness in financial conditions, the Committee 
may make downside adjustments to required reserves,  if deemed necessary. 
13.  Economic activity maintains a moderate and stable c ourse of growth. Consumption 
spending fuels the domestic demand, while investmen ts remain relatively sluggish. 
Despite the adverse effects of geopolitical develop ments on external demand, 
exports of goods to the European Union countries re main strong. Restored relations 
with Russia may support external demand as of the l ast quarter. Accordingly, exports 
are expected to provide further support to growth i n the upcoming period. 
Meanwhile, the steady increase in employment and wa ge developments boost 
domestic demand through the income channel. In this  respect, economic activity is 
expected to grow moderately across the year. 
14.  Recent terrorist attacks and domestic developments pose a downside risk to 
economic activity especially through the tourism se ctor. Thus, the economy may 
witness a slowdown in the second and third quarters  in which tourism revenues 
register high share within economic activity. In fa ct, leading indicators of the second 
quarter point to a quarter-on-quarter deceleration,  which may also continue through 
the third quarter. On the other hand, the economy i s expected to maintain a steady 
course of growth amid structural arrangements and i nvestment incentives. Against 
this background, risks to economic activity are lik ely to be balanced in the medium 
term. 
15.  The current account deficit may widen slightly in t he short term even though external 
balances continue to recover. The current account b alance is being positively 
affected by the lagged effects of the decline in en ergy prices. Moreover, the 
moderate course of loans and the increasing share o f commercial loans in loan 
composition also support the improvement in the cur rent account balance. However, 
the fact that the current economic growth is fueled  by the domestic demand and that 
the tourism sector is experiencing a slowdown signa ls for a possible deceleration in 
the recovery of the current account balance in the upcoming period. Yet, the current 
account deficit is estimated to hover at reasonable  and predictable levels across the 
year. 
16.  Inflation forecasts accommodate both upside and dow nside risks. Recent exchange 
rate developments pose an upside risk to inflation through the cost channel. 
Moreover, the possible adjustments to administered prices and taxes to compensate 
for the effect of the recent rise in budget expendi tures on fiscal balances may push 
inflation upwards towards the end of the year. On t he other hand, latest domestic 
developments constitute downside risks to demand an d inflation through the 
confidence channel and the tourism sector. The Comm ittee will closely monitor the 
developments affecting inflation and take necessary  policy measures to achieve price 
stability. 
17.  Despite experiencing significant external shocks in  recent years, the adopted policy 
framework was successful in containing the deterior ation in inflation and inflation  expectations. However, at this point, price stabili ty is yet to be achieved. Ten years of 
experience with the inflation targeting regime show ed that combatting inflation 
requires joint efforts. Thus, in order to reduce in flation to the 5-percent target 
permanently, all institutions must fulfill their du ties by taking structural factors into 
account. In this respect, actions taken by the Food  Committee set an invaluable 
precedent. In the upcoming period, the CBRT will co ntribute to these efforts by 
undertaking extensive studies to examine structural  issues in inflation dynamics. 
18.  Global financial markets and capital flows remain h ighly volatile. Despite the recent 
slight rise in the risk appetite, persisting concer ns over global growth and 
uncertainties in global monetary policies feed into  volatility. The tight monetary 
policy stance, the cautious macroprudential policy and the effective use of the policy 
tools announced in the road map of August 2015 enha nced the resilience of the 
economy against external shocks to a certain extent . However, adverse domestic 
developments may cause fluctuations in markets if a ccompanied by global volatilities 
and this may place extra pressure on financial cond itions. The Committee will closely 
monitor the developments in both global and domesti c markets and take necessary 
stabilizing measures by utilizing its large variety  of tools. 
19.  The recent monetary policy decisions of the Committ ee should be evaluated under 
the scope of the simplification process. The ultima te aim of the simplification is to 
achieve a narrow and symmetrical corridor and provi de funding via a single rate. The 
simplification is believed to contribute to the eff ectiveness of the transmission 
mechanism. Therefore, simplification of the monetar y policy is planned to be 
finalized within a reasonable schedule. The pace an d timing of simplification will 
depend on the developments regarding inflation and financial stability. 
20.  Developments in the fiscal policy and tax adjustmen ts are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. T he baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal disc ipline will be maintained and there 
will be no unanticipated hikes in administered pric es. A revision of the monetary 
policy stance may be considered should the fiscal p olicy deviate significantly from this 
framework, and consequently have an adverse effect on the medium-term inflation 
outlook. 
21.  Sustained fiscal discipline has become essential in  reducing the sensitivity of the 
Turkish economy against external shocks in recent y ears. In the current environment 
of highly uncertain global markets, the gains from maintaining and further advancing 
these achievements are significant. Any measure to provide permanent fiscal 
discipline and reduction in the savings deficit wil l support macroeconomic stability 
and contribute positively to social welfare by keep ing interest rates of long-term 
government securities at low levels. 