   
 
No: 2016-15  
PRESS RELEASE  
April 20, 2016 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Murat Çetinkaya (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Tura lay Kenç, Necati Şahin, Abdullah Yavaş, Mehmet 
Yörükoğlu.  
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to set the short term interest rates as 
follows: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate has  been reduced from 10.50 percent to 10 
percent, and borrowing rate has been kept at 7.25 p ercent, 
b)  One-week repo rate has been kept at 7.5 percent, 
c)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing rate has been 
kept at 0 percent, and lending rate has been reduce d from 12 percent to 11.50 percent. 
Annual loan growth continues at reasonable rates in  response to the tight monetary policy stance and 
macroprudential measures. The favorable development s in the terms of trade and the moderate course of 
consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the  current account balance. Demand from the European 
Union economies continues to support exports at an increasing pace, despite elevated geopolitical risk s in 
other export markets. Recent data and the leading i ndicators show that economic activity displays a 
moderate and stable course of growth. The Committee  assesses that the implementation of the structural  
reforms would contribute to the potential growth si gnificantly. 
Recently, decline in the global volatility has cont inued and global financial conditions have improved . Along 
with these developments, the effective use of the p olicy instruments laid out in the road map publishe d in 
August 2015 has reduced the need for a wide interes t rate corridor. In this respect, the Committee dec ided 
to take a measured step towards simplification.  
Recently, inflation displayed a marked decline, whi ch was mainly due to unprocessed food prices. This 
decline is expected to continue in the short run. H owever, improvement in the underlying core inflatio n 
trend remains limited, necessitating the maintenanc e of a tight liquidity stance.  
Future monetary policy decisions will be conditiona l on the inflation outlook. Taking into account inf lation 
expectations, pricing behavior and the course of ot her factors affecting inflation, the tight monetary  policy 
stance will be maintained.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five working days. 
 
