   
 
No: 2016-07  
PRESS RELEASE  
26 January 2016 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 19 January 2016       
Inflation Developments 
1.  In December, consumer prices edged up by 0.21 perce nt, and annual inflation rose by 
0.71 points to 8.81 percent. This rise in inflation  is attributed to the increase in 
unprocessed food prices and the base effect in ener gy prices. Core goods inflation 
continued to rise, and services inflation maintaine d its high level. Thus, annual 
inflation of core indicators recorded an increase, while its underlying trend improved 
slightly. 
2.  Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverage s rose by 1.35 points to 10.87 
percent. This was driven by the rising prices of ve getables, and the annual rate of 
price increases reached 23.32 percent in this sub-g roup. Thus, unprocessed food 
inflation climbed to 13.83 percent, maintaining its  high course of the last two years. 
On the processed food front, annual inflation incre ased to 8.33 percent due 
particularly to the price developments in oils and bread-cereals groups. Leading 
indicators for January suggest a persisting high co urse in food inflation. 
3.  On the energy front, despite a monthly decline by 0 .22 percent in prices, annual 
inflation climbed to 2.96 percent due to the base e ffect in December. In January, the 
fall in oil prices notwithstanding, energy inflatio n is expected to increase further 
owing both to the low base in 2015 and the adjustme nt in electricity prices. In 
addition to the adjustment in electricity prices, a djustments introduced to some 
items with administered prices like tobacco and alc oholic drinks in early January will 
have a direct effect on inflation close to 0.7 poin t. 
4.  Prices of services increased by 0.22 percent, and a nnual services inflation slightly 
increased to 8.85 percent in the last month of the year. Thus, prices of services 
claimed the highest year-end increase since 2008. F ood prices affected services 
inflation adversely through the catering services c hannel across the year, leading the 
restaurants-hotels group to register the highest in crease, 13.23 percent, within the 
sub-groups. Meanwhile, the cumulative depreciation in the exchange rate coupled 
with the course of the headline inflation and the e ffects of wage developments stood 
 out as other factors for the high course of service s inflation. On the other hand, 
slowing oil prices curbed services inflation throug h transport services. 
5.  Annual core goods inflation rose by 0.61 points to 10.22 percent in December. 
Annual inflation followed a flat course in durable goods, but recorded increases in 
other sub-groups. The cumulative depreciation in th e Turkish lira continued to affect 
core goods, albeit with some slowdown. Clothing inf lation remained on the rise, and 
annual inflation in this group rose by around 4.7 p oints to 9 percent in the last three-
month-period. Seasonally-adjusted data indicated a decrease in the underlying trend 
of core goods inflation in December. 
6.  In sum, international energy prices continue to aff ect inflation favorably. On the 
other hand, other cost factors limit the improvemen t in the core inflation trend. 
Factors Affecting Inflation  
7.  Industrial production recorded a month-on-month dec line in November, yet the 
October-November average of the index stood above t he third-quarter level. Among 
the BTS order indicators of the last three months, the domestic market orders 
registered a recovery, while the export orders decl ined. The Headline PMI and PMI 
production indices recorded an increase in December , following the increase in 
November, and remained above the stationary level. Despite the decline in 
December, consumer confidence indices stood above t he level in October. The 
investor confidence also increased moderately in De cember. Against this background, 
industrial production is expected to register an in crease on a monthly basis in 
December. 
8.  Data on the expenditure side suggest a milder cours e of private demand growth in 
the last quarter of 2015 relative to the third quar ter. In the October-November 
period, production and imports of consumption goods  registered a decline compared 
to the average of the previous quarter. Sales of wh ite goods and automobiles 
trended downwards as well. Among indicators of inve stment, production of capital 
goods increased further in the October-November per iod, yet the imports receded. 
Manufacture of non-metallic mineral products and sa les of heavy commercial 
vehicles, which are among the indicators for constr uction investment, registered a 
decline. 
9.  Favorable developments in the terms of trade accomp anied by the moderate course 
of consumer loans support the recovery in the curre nt account balance. Demand 
from the European Union economies continues to supp ort exports, despite elevated 
geopolitical risks in other export markets. The tre nd of recovery in the European 
economy, which is a significant trading partner of Turkey, continued in the last 
quarter of 2015. In addition to the recovery trend in the Euro area, high market-
shifting flexibility supports exports. Accordingly,  improvement in the current account 
balance is expected to continue with the support of  increased demand from the EU  countries, low course of commodity prices, and ongo ing macroprudential policy 
measures. 
10.  In October 2015, unemployment rates registered a mo nth-on-month increase. Labor 
force in non-farm sectors grew more than employment  in this period. Industrial 
employment increased, while construction employment  remained unchanged. 
Services employment, on the other hand, displayed a  slight decline. Industrial 
production and survey indicators signal an increase  in employment in the upcoming 
period. Manufacture of non-metallic mineral product s hints at no additional revival in 
the construction sector. In the services sector, em ployment data in sub-sectors 
follow a fluctuating course. Accordingly, unemploym ent rates in the last quarter are 
expected to remain close to those of the third quar ter. 
11.  To sum up, recent indicators suggest that growth in  economic activity will continue in 
the last quarter of 2015, albeit at a slower pace. Despite the downside risk due to 
geopolitical developments, the recovery in the Euro pean economies continues to 
positively contribute to external demand. In the up coming period, domestic demand 
is likely to be supported by the income channel thr ough wage increases and the low 
course of oil prices, and by the confidence channel  through waning domestic 
uncertainties. Hence, growth in economic activity i s expected to continue. 
Monetary Policy and Risks  
12.  The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) discu ssed the medium-term 
projections to be published in the January Inflatio n Report.  Inflation in the last 
quarter of 2015 exceeded the projections of the Oct ober Inflation Report mainly due 
to unprocessed food prices. However, inflation excl uding unprocessed food and 
tobacco was close to the October forecast in this p eriod. Core inflation remained high 
due to the lagged effects of the cumulative depreci ation in the Turkish lira, yet the 
ongoing fall in import prices in the fourth quarter  limited the rise in CPI inflation. 
Evaluating assumptions underlying the inflation for ecasts and the course of 
exogenous variables, an upward revision was made to  the end-2016 inflation 
forecast, in consideration of the effects of the re visions in the Turkish lira-
denominated import and oil prices, administered pri ce adjustments announced in 
January and minimum wage arrangements. 
13.  Energy price developments continue to affect inflat ion favorably, while other cost 
factors limit the improvement in the core inflation  trend. Food prices remain volatile 
due mainly to the unprocessed food group. Lagged ef fects of the depreciation in the 
Turkish lira are evident particularly on the core g oods inflation. Moreover, as the 
minimum-wage adjustment passes through to overall w ages, cost and demand 
pressures on inflation stemming from wages are like ly to increase in the upcoming 
period. Accordingly, core inflation indicators are expected to remain high for a while. 
The effect of the above-target inflation on expecta tions and the acceleration in wage 
increases require the pricing behavior regarding th e overall economy to be 
monitored closely. In this respect, considering the  impact of wage developments and  the uncertainties in global markets on inflation ex pectations and pricing behavior, 
and taking into account the volatility in energy an d unprocessed food prices, the 
Committee stated that the tight liquidity stance wi ll be maintained as long as deemed 
necessary. Future monetary policy decisions will be  conditional on the inflation 
outlook. Taking into account inflation expectations , the pricing behavior and the 
course of other factors affecting inflation, the ti ght monetary policy stance will be 
maintained.  
14.  Annual loan growth continues at reasonable levels i n response to the tight monetary 
policy stance and macroprudential measures. The rec ent growth trend of loans 
reveals that both consumer and commercial loans rem ained below historical 
averages; consumer loans throughout 2015, commercia l loans only in the second half 
of the year. Recent arrangements in risk weights an d minimum wages are considered 
to boost loan growth through the loan supply and ho usehold income channels. On 
the other hand, the ongoing tightness in financial conditions is likely to keep the 
annual loan growth rates at reasonable levels. With  respect to the composition of 
loans, commercial loans continue to grow faster tha n consumer loans. Such a 
composition not only limits medium-term inflationar y pressures but also supports 
the improvement in the current account balance. 
15.  In the upcoming period, it is envisaged that the do mestic demand will provide a 
slightly larger contribution to growth and the risi ng demand from the European 
Union countries will continue to improve exports. T he recovery in the investor and 
consumer confidence led by waning domestic uncertai nties, the room for spending 
amid the fall in oil prices and the effects of the recent wage developments on the 
purchasing power are projected to boost domestic de mand. Persisting global 
volatilities and the tightness in financial conditi ons stand out as the factors that limit 
the domestic demand increase. On the foreign demand  front, geopolitical 
developments pose a downside risk, yet the trend of  rebound in the European 
economy coupled with the market-shifting flexibilit y of our exports cap this risk. In 
fact, exports towards the European Union countries have recently recorded a 
remarkable acceleration. Moreover, improvements in the terms of trade mainly led 
by the sharp fall in commodity prices, accompanied by the sluggish course of 
consumer loans support the improvement in the curre nt account balance. 
Accordingly, the current account deficit is expecte d to decline further in the 
upcoming period. 
16.  Uncertainties surrounding global monetary policies and concerns over global growth 
cause financial markets to remain volatile. Thus, p ortfolio flows to emerging 
economies and risk indicators follow a highly volat ile pattern. Exchange rates also 
display a quite fluctuating course. The Committee b elieves that the policy tools 
placed in the road map announced in August 2015 str engthen the resilience of the 
economy against global shocks.  17.  In the upcoming period, both global and domestic vo latilities will be monitored 
closely and required measures will continue to be t aken.  In this context, related 
departments presented information to the Committee on the foreign exchange 
liquidity instruments and methods that have been us ed since 18 August 2015 and 
that may be used in the upcoming periods and their effects.  
18.  In case the decline in loan growth rates becomes pe rmanent and exchange rates 
continue to face upward pressure, the Committee, wh ile preserving the tight 
monetary policy stance, may take measures to suppor t the Turkish lira and loan 
growth by reconsidering the funding conditions for the use of foreign currency 
denominated collateral.  
19.  In this respect, the Committee stated that the poli cy stance will remain tight against 
the inflation outlook, stabilizing for the FX liqui dity and supportive of the financial 
stability. 
20.  The Committee stated that the wide interest rate co rridor has contributed to 
containing exchange rate volatility in times of hei ghtened global volatility. The need 
for such an instrument would be reduced, should the  decline in global volatility prove 
persistent. Another factor reducing the need for a wide interest rate corridor is the 
effective use of policy instruments laid out in the  road map published in August. 
Excessive fluctuations both in exchange rates and l oans have waned owing to the 
launch and effective use of these instruments. The Committee’s assessment still 
prevails that the monetary policy may be implemente d within a narrower and more 
standard interest rate corridor, should global vola tilities see a permanent decline or 
the policy tools specified in the August road map p ermanently cap the effects of the 
global volatility on the Turkish economy. 
21.  Developments in the fiscal policy and tax adjustmen ts are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. T he baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal disc ipline will be maintained and there 
will be no unanticipated hikes in administered pric es. A revision of the monetary 
policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from 
this framework, and consequently have an adverse ef fect on the medium-term 
inflation outlook. 
22.  Sustained fiscal discipline has become a fundamenta l element in reducing the 
sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external  shocks in recent years. In the 
current environment of highly uncertain global mark ets, the value added from 
maintaining and further advancing these achievement s is significant. Any measure 
that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings 
deficit will support macroeconomic stability and co ntribute positively to social 
welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term gove rnment securities at low levels. 