   
 
No: 2016-09  
PRESS RELEASE  
February 23, 2016 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Erdem Başçı (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Murat Çe tinkaya, Turalay Kenç, Necati Şahin, Abdullah Yavaş , 
Mehmet Yörükoğlu.  
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to keep the short term interest rates 
constant at the following levels: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate at 10.75 percent, and borrowing rate at 7.25 
percent, 
b)  One-week repo rate at 7.5 percent, 
c)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing rate at 0 percent, 
and lending rate at 12.25 percent. 
Annual loan growth continues at reasonable rates in  response to the tight monetary policy stance and 
macroprudential measures. The favorable development s in the terms of trade and the moderate course of 
consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the  current account balance. Demand from the European 
Union economies continues to support exports at an increasing pace, despite elevated geopolitical risk s in 
other export markets. The Committee assesses that t he implementation of the announced structural 
reforms would contribute to the potential growth si gnificantly. 
Energy price developments affect inflation favorabl y, while other cost factors limit the improvement i n the 
core indicators. Considering the wage developments and the impact of the uncertainty in global markets  on 
inflation expectations and pricing behavior and tak ing into account the volatility in energy and unpro cessed 
food prices, the Committee stated that the tight li quidity stance will be maintained as long as deemed  
necessary.  
Future monetary policy decisions will be conditiona l on the inflation outlook. Taking into account inf lation 
expectations, pricing behavior and the course of ot her factors affecting inflation, the tight monetary  policy 
stance will be maintained.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five working days. 
 
