No: 2016-23

PRESS RELEASE
June 21, 2016

DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
Participating Committee Members
Murat Çetinkaya (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Erkan Kilimci, Murat Uysal, Abdullah Yavaş.

The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to set the short term interest rates as
follows:
a) Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate has been reduced from 9.5 percent to 9 percent,
and borrowing rate has been kept at 7.25 percent,
b) One-week repo rate has been kept at 7.5 percent,
c) Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing rate has been
kept at 0 percent, and lending rate has been reduced from 11 percent to 10.5 percent.
Annual loan growth continues at reasonable rates in response to the tight monetary policy stance and
macroprudential measures. The favorable developments in the terms of trade and the moderate course of
consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance. While domestic demand
continues to have a positive impact on growth, demand from the European Union economies continues to
support exports. Accordingly economic activity displays a moderate and stable course of growth. The
Committee assesses that the implementation of the structural reforms would contribute to the potential
growth significantly.
Recently, the global volatility has increased to some extent. The Committee assesses that the tight
monetary policy stance, the cautious macroprudential policies and the effective use of the policy
instruments laid out in the road map published in August 2015 increase the resilience of the economy
against shocks. In this respect, the Committee decided to take a measured step towards simplification.
Inflation has displayed a marked decline in recent months, mainly due to favorable course of unprocessed
food prices and the improvement in the core inflation trend. However, the developments in services
inflation and unit labor costs necessitate the maintenance of a tight liquidity stance.
Future monetary policy decisions will be conditional on the inflation outlook. Taking into account inflation
expectations, pricing behavior and the course of other factors affecting inflation, the tight monetary policy
stance will be maintained.
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its stance.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working days.

