1 
   
 
No: 2016-57  
PRESS RELEASE  
01 December 2016 
 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
       Meeting Date: 24 November 2016 
        Inflation Developments  
1.  In October, consumer prices went up by 1.44 percent , while annual consumer 
inflation fell by 0.12 points to 7.16 percent. As s tated in the Summary of the 
Monetary Policy Committee Meeting of October, food inflation increased, yet 
annual inflation in core indicators declined due to  the fall in core goods and services 
inflation. The underlying trends of core indicators  slowed due to the prices of 
services in this period. 
2.  Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverage s rose by 1.04 points to 5.20 
percent. Although annual inflation in unprocessed f ood increased mostly due to the 
prices of vegetables, seasonally-adjusted prices re corded a decline in October as in 
the preceding two months. Meanwhile, annual food in flation excluding fresh fruits 
and vegetables maintained its favorable course. Lea ding indicators regarding 
November suggest a substantial decline in annual fo od inflation. On the energy 
front, fuel prices drove annual energy inflation up wards in October to 4.71 percent, 
despite the reduction in natural gas prices. The ri se in fuel prices is attributed to the 
sustained effects of the raised SCT through October  as well as the depreciation in 
the Turkish lira and the uptrend in oil prices.  
3.  Prices of services inched up by 0.35 percent, and a nnual services inflation fell by 
0.39 points to 7.80 percent in October. Annual infl ation increased in rent, remained 
flat in the restaurant-hotel group and decreased in  other sub-groups in this period. 
Annual rent inflation remained on the increase due to the İstanbul and hit 9.11 
percent. Inflation in other services receded amid t he slowdown in economic activity. 
In this respect, the underlying trend of services i nflation slowed down. 
4.  Annual core goods inflation fell by 0.83 points to 6.15 percent in October. The 
waning cumulative effects of the exchange rate coup led with the deceleration in 
domestic demand drove annual inflation down in all subgroups. However, the recent 
depreciation in the Turkish lira confined the impro vement in annual core goods 
inflation. The underlying trend of core goods infla tion remained flat in this period. 
2 
 On the other hand, the underlying trend is expected  to increase in the short run due 
to the weak course of the Turkish lira.  
5.  In sum, the slowdown in aggregate demand contribute s to the fall in inflation. 
However, the recent exchange rate movements resulti ng from increased global 
uncertainty and high volatility limit the improveme nt in inflation outlook. 
     Factors Affecting Inflation 
6.  Recently released data indicate a deceleration in e conomic activity for the third 
quarter. The second-quarter downturn in industrial output deepened in the third 
quarter. Third-quarter production was principally h it by the loss of working days 
caused by the extended religious holidays in July a nd September and the incidents 
of July 15. Even excluding these effects, which are  to be counterbalanced in the 
fourth quarter, underlying production was down, alb eit at a slower clip. Being more 
pronounced as of the third quarter, the slump in to urism revenues was a key driver 
of the slowing underlying output growth through its  direct and indirect effects. 
7.  The Committee reported that economic activity edged  up when adjusted for 
working days that sparked an output fluctuation in the second half. Recent 
indicators hint at a more upbeat outlook for the fo urth quarter. Production picked 
up slightly across credit-sensitive sectors, especi ally the motor industry, and related 
fields of activity. Given the base effect from unwo rked days, industrial production is 
expected to record a marked quarter-on-quarter rebo und in the fourth quarter.  
8.  July’s domestic tensions dampened final domestic de mand through both consumer 
and investment spending in the third quarter. Data on production and imports 
suggest that the third-quarter consumption fall was  more severe for durable goods. 
On the capital goods front, the slowdown spilled ov er into all industries. In fact, the 
production and imports of machinery and equipment a nd of minerals were down in 
the third quarter. The slide in construction employ ment confirms the weakening 
construction industry. 
9.  Economic activity is expected to recover by the fin al quarter amid accommodative 
incentives and measures. This estimation is support ed by the data on mortgage and 
auto markets. Thanks to more accommodative monetary  conditions and other 
newly-adopted measures, consumer loans gained modes tly in recent months, 
buoying up the improvement projected for the final quarter. Moreover, the public 
sector is likely to provide an increased investment  support for growth in the fourth 
quarter. Yet, the recent Turkish lira plunge and vo latile exchange rates might weigh 
on private demand in the upcoming period, curbing a lready weak investments in 
particular. The repercussions of exchange rate chan ges on the confidence over 
company balance sheets and the overall economic env ironment will be the main 
factors affecting the pace of growth in the coming months. 
10.  The growing EU demand continues to bolster exports.  Turkey’s flexibility in market 
diversification continues to cushion exports agains t the negative effects of 3 
 geopolitical tensions on external demand. Moreover,  newly-restored relations with 
Russia translated into a boost for exports. The glo omy tourism industry continues to 
have a negative impact on the current account balan ce, which, however, is 
alleviated by the lagged pass-through of terms-of-t rade developments and the 
moderate course of loans. However, commodity prices  are expected to become 
gradually less accommodative for the current accoun t deficit in the upcoming 
period. 
11.  The labor market outlook continued to deteriorate i n August due to sluggish 
economic activity. Across nonfarm sectors, industri al employment remained on the 
decline, albeit at a slower rate, while constructio n employment was flat. 
Employment continued to edge up in services. Leadin g indicators point to an upturn 
in underlying unemployment. However, given the wani ng effects of the July turmoil, 
the significant rise in October’s PMI employment in dex boding well for industrial 
employment gains and the subsiding repercussions of  the tourism slump, the climb 
in unemployment might come to a standstill. 
12.  In short, economic activity is expected to post a q uarterly fall in the third quarter. 
Domestic demand is envisaged to pick up in the upco ming period on the back of 
incentives stimulating domestic demand and recoveri ng consumer loans. Given the 
base effect from unworked days of the third quarter , economic activity is likely to 
accelerate on a quarterly basis in the final quarte r, producing a moderate growth for 
2016. However, the tightening in financial conditio ns driven by the recent global 
turbulence remains a downside risk on domestic dema nd recovery.  
      Monetary Policy and Risks  
13.  The CBRT’s liquidity measures and macroprudential p olicies remain accommodative 
for financial conditions. Consumer loans have grown  recently, particularly for 
mortgages, amid falling interest rates and macropru dential measures. Nevertheless, 
due to global and geopolitical spillovers into dome stic financial markets, commercial 
loans have yet to pick up robustly.  
14.  Long-term interest rates are currently on the rise across advanced economies, while 
projections for policy rates are revised upwards. T he high likelihood of a Fed rate 
hike in December and the increased global uncertain ty driven by the US presidential 
election send emerging financial markets into turbu lence, inducing portfolio 
outflows. The negative impact of all these developm ents on lending standards is 
partly counterbalanced by liquidity measures, macro prudential policies and other 
incentives. Should financial conditions tighten mor e than expected, the CBRT will 
continue to use required reserves and other liquidi ty tools to support markets. 
15.  Domestic demand is expected to start recovering by the fourth quarter amid 
accommodative incentives and measures. Yet, global market turmoil and 
geopolitical risks keep a firm lid on the pace of e conomic recovery. Thus, economic 
activity is likely to grow modestly over the upcomi ng period. The CBRT will continue 4 
 to monitor how developments in economic activity wo uld affect price stability and 
financial stability. The Committee stated that adop ting structural reforms may boost 
the economy’s growth potential to a large extent. 
16.  The slower-than-expected economic recovery remains a downside risk to inflation, 
while exchange rate movements driven by heightened global uncertainty and 
volatility pose an upside risk to the inflation out look. 
17.  The Committee decided to implement monetary tighten ing to contain the adverse 
impact of exchange rate developments on expectation s and the pricing behavior. 
Moreover, this decision is expected to have more pr ofound effects through 
supportive measures for the currency market. Accord ingly, the Committee decided 
to provide repayment flexibility for export redisco unt credits and to reduce the 
quantity of foreign-exchange required reserves.  
18.  In the upcoming period, monetary policy decisions w ill depend on the inflation 
outlook. The CBRT will maintain its cautious stance  by taking into account the 
developments in inflation expectations, the pricing  behavior and other factors 
affecting inflation. 
19.  The Committee maintains its position that the simpl ification should be completed 
within an appropriate time frame. The gains that we re planned through 
simplification are performing to a great extent. Th e direction and the timing of the 
next step toward simplification will depend on the developments in inflation and 
financial stability. 
20.  Developments in fiscal policy and tax adjustments a re monitored closely with regard 
to their effects on the inflation outlook. The base line monetary policy stance is 
formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipl ine will be maintained and there 
will be no unanticipated hikes in administered pric es. A revision of the monetary 
policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from 
this framework, and consequently have an adverse ef fect on the medium-term 
inflation outlook. 
21.  In recent years, sustaining fiscal discipline has b ecome one of the major factors in 
reducing the sensitivity of the Turkish economy aga inst external shocks. In the 
current environment of high global uncertainty, it is critical to maintain and further 
enhance these achievements. Any measure to provide permanent fiscal discipline 
and to reduce the savings deficit will support macr oeconomic stability and 
contribute positively to social welfare by keeping the interest rates of long-term 
government securities at low levels. 
 
 