1 
   
 
Number: 2016-45  
PRESS RELEASE  
October 27, 2016 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: 20 October 2016 
Inflation Developments  
1.  In September, consumer prices went up by 0.18 perce nt, while annual consumer 
inflation fell by 0.77 points to 7.28 percent. As s tated in the Summary of the 
Monetary Policy Committee Meeting of September, bei ng driven by unprocessed 
food prices, the deceleration in food inflation con tinued. Moreover, weakening 
demand conditions also supported the disinflation p rocess. On the other hand, the 
tax rise in fuel products curbed the improvement in  inflation through direct and 
indirect effects. Core indicators’ annual inflation  declined while their underlying 
trends somewhat improved in this period. 
2.  Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverage s decreased by 2.03 points to 
4.16 percent due mainly to the decline in prices of  fresh fruits and vegetables. 
Meanwhile, inflation in food items excluding fresh fruits and vegetables maintained 
its favorable course. Leading indicators regarding October suggest some increase in 
food inflation. On the energy front, prices increas ed on account of rising taxes on 
fuel products. Annual energy inflation climbed to 4 .56 percent. Recent 
developments in the exchange rate and international  oil prices are envisaged to 
push October energy inflation upwards, yet this adv erse effect is likely to be partly 
offset by the reduction in natural gas prices at th e start of the month. 
3.  Prices of services increased by 0.89 percent, and a nnual services inflation inched up 
by 0.11 points to 8.19 percent in September. Annual  inflation increased in transport 
services; remained flat in rent, and decreased in o ther sub-groups in this period. 
Inflation in the restaurant-hotel group decelerated  further due to the favorable 
course of food prices stemming from the contraction  in tourism, whereas prices of 
transport services witnessed an upsurge amid fuel p rice hikes. In this respect, the 
underlying trend of services inflation exhibited an  uptick. 
4.  Annual core goods inflation fell by 1.70 points to 6.97 percent in September. Being 
more evident in durable goods, annual inflation dec reased in all subgroups. The fall 
in core goods inflation is attributed to the waning  cumulative effects of the 
2 
 exchange rate coupled with the deceleration in dome stic demand. Accordingly, the 
underlying trend in core goods exhibited a remarkab le slowdown in this period. 
5.  In sum, the slowdown in aggregate demand contribute s to the gradual fall in core 
inflation. However, exchange rate developments and other cost factors limit the 
improvement in inflation outlook. 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
6.  Recent data releases and indicators for the third q uarter point to deceleration in 
economic activity. The second-quarter plunge in ind ustrial production has deepened 
due to the sharp drop in July. This output fall in July is largely attributed to the 
demand-side effects of the domestic turbulence as w ell as to the loss of working 
days caused by the Ramadan holiday and the incident s of July 15. In fact, industrial 
production recovered by a rapid 9.4 percent month-o n-month in August, confirming 
that July’s output loss was not a good indicator of  the underlying trend. Both PMI 
indicators for new orders and output and the manufa cturing industry capacity 
utilization rate edged upward in September. Notwith standing the upbeat outlook 
suggested by survey indicators, production may see a renewed slowdown due to 
bridge-day effects caused by the extended holiday f or the Sacrifice Feast in 
September, leading to a quarter-on-quarter decline in industrial production in the 
third quarter. 
7.  Domestic demand is expected to pick up by the fourt h quarter amid accommodative 
incentives and measures. July’s domestic tensions d ampened final domestic demand 
to a great extent through both consumer and investm ent spending. In the July-
August period, the production and imports of consum er goods and the consumption 
of durable goods were markedly down from the second  quarter. On the investment 
front, data on the production and imports of machin ery and equipment showed that 
investments remained weak over the third quarter. A n indicator for construction 
activity, the production and imports of nonmetallic  minerals declined, suggesting 
that construction investments slowed in the third q uarter. 
8.  Recent data signal that domestic demand started to rebound in the fourth quarter. 
Consumer loans have inched up in recent months than ks to more accommodative 
monetary conditions and other measures in place, co nfirming expectations of an 
upturn for the final quarter. Restoration of produc er and consumer confidence due 
to waning uncertainties and demand-stimulating poli cies will be the main drivers of 
economic recovery in the upcoming period. 
9.  Growing EU demand continued to bolster exports. Tur key’s flexibility in market 
diversification continues to cushion exports agains t the negative effects of 
geopolitical tensions on external demand. Yet, rece nt data show that exports and 
imports of goods were largely affected by the July turbulence. Despite some 
recovery in August and September, trade of goods de clined in the third quarter. 
Spillovers from the troubled tourism industry into net exports were more 3 
 pronounced in the summer months. The tourism slump continues to have a negative 
impact on the current account balance, which, howev er, is somewhat alleviated by 
the lagged pass-through of terms-of-trade developme nts and the moderate course 
of consumer loans. However, commodity prices are ex pected to become gradually 
less accommodative for the current account deficit in the coming months. 
10.  The deteriorating labor market outlook of May and J une continued into July due to 
falling industrial employment, causing unemployment  rates to remain on the rise. 
Employment gains in services lost more pace amid sl uggish economic activity. Across 
non-farm industries, the previous quarter’s decline  in construction employment 
came to a halt. Additionally, according to the SSI data on registered employees, the 
employment fall in major tourism industries (accomm odation, travel agents and 
tour operators) turned around in July. Moreover, th e PMI for industrial employment 
signals no additional deterioration for September y et remains low. Given the weak 
economic activity and leading indicators for employ ment, unemployment rates are 
expected to climb further in the third quarter. 
11.  In sum, economic activity is expected to recede in the third quarter. However, 
domestic demand is envisaged to pick up in the upco ming period on the back of less 
uncertainty, restored producer and consumer confide nce, incentives stimulating 
domestic demand and recovering consumer loans.  
Monetary Policy and Risks 
12.  The Committee evaluated the medium-term projections  to be published in the 
October Inflation Report. In the third quarter of t he year, inflation recorded a 
decline on account of the improvements in unprocess ed food and core inflation 
indicators. While the lagged effects of the cumulat ive exchange rate developments 
on annual inflation continued to wane, slowing aggr egate demand supported 
disinflation and the underlying trend of core infla tion improved. However, the tax 
rise in fuel products restrained the recovery in in flation through energy and 
transport prices. Although the developments in TL-d enominated import prices are 
expected to push inflation upwards, the mild course  of aggregate demand is 
projected to support the gradual decline in core in flation. Moreover, forecasts are 
based on the assumption that the year-end food infl ation in 2016 and 2017 will be 
lower than the projections of the previous Report a mid the tourism-induced 
slowdown in food demand and the actions taken by th e Food Committee. 
13.  Accordingly, the year-end consumer inflation foreca st for 2016 remained unchanged 
as downside and upside effects on inflation cancell ed each other out.  On the other 
hand, end-2017 consumer inflation forecast was revi sed upwards by 0.5 points as 
the upside effects driven by import prices outweigh ed the effects of the downward 
revision in the output gap and food inflation. 
14.  Overall financial conditions is buoyed by macroprud ential arrangements and 
reduced tightness in monetary conditions thanks to the CBRT’s policy actions. The 4 
 gradual fall in the marginal funding rate has parti ally passed through to loan and 
deposit rates. Supported also by the recently enfor ced macroprudential measures, 
consumer loans displayed recovery in the last coupl e of months. On the other hand, 
due to global and geopolitical developments that ha d effects on domestic financial 
markets, tightness in loan conditions has not witne ssed a notable decline yet. As the 
downgrade of Turkey’s sovereign credit rating to be low investment grade at the end 
of September was largely anticipated by markets, th e reaction of financial markets 
remained limited. Even though this downgrade weighs  on external funding costs, 
loan conditions are supported by liquidity measures , macroprudential arrangements 
and other incentives. On the other hand, the CBRT m ay introduce accommodative 
adjustments to required reserves and other liquidit y instruments in case of a higher-
than-expected tightness in financial conditions. 
15.  The latest data indicate a significant slowdown in economic activity in the third 
quarter. Recent accommodative measures and incentiv es are projected to stimulate 
a rebound in domestic demand starting from the last  quarter. Accordingly, economic 
activity is expected to register a mild growth in t he remainder of 2016 and 
throughout 2017. However, the pace of the recovery in tourism revenues, the global 
economic outlook, the uncertainties regarding the m onetary policies of advanced 
economies and geopolitical developments pose downsi de risks to economic activity. 
The CBRT will continue to monitor closely the impac ts of the developments in 
economic activity on price stability and financial stability. 
16.  There are both upside and downside risks to inflati on forecasts. Inflation may settle 
on a lower-than-expected path, should economic acti vity recover at a slower-than-
envisioned pace in the upcoming period. On the othe r hand, uncertainties regarding 
oil prices and global markets pose an upside risk t o inflation through the cost 
channel. Meanwhile, the volatility in food prices p ose risks in both directions for 
2017. The CBRT will closely monitor the development s affecting inflation and take 
necessary policy measures to achieve price stabilit y. 
17.  Leading indicators for the third quarter of 2016 po int to a mild improvement in 
global economic activity. However, due to the histo rically low levels of global growth 
and trade volume, interest rates in advanced econom ies remain low. Accordingly, 
risk appetite towards emerging economies has follow ed a robust course in recent 
months. On the other hand, uncertainties regarding global monetary policies cause 
fluctuations in portfolio inflows. In fact, amid st rengthened perceptions about the 
Fed’s possible rate hike coupled with the uncertain ties regarding the monetary 
policies of other advanced economies, portfolio flo ws towards emerging economies 
have recently trended downwards after a surge follo wing the previous reporting 
period. 
18.  Against this background, marginal funding rate, whi ch was gradually lowered under 
the simplification process since March 2016, was ke pt constant in October. The 
completion of the simplification will ensure fundin g via a single rate, thereby 5 
 bringing short-term market rates closer to the CBRT  funding rate. Simplification is 
believed to contribute to the effectiveness of the transmission mechanism by 
providing better assessment of the monetary policy stance. Therefore, simplification 
of the monetary policy will be finalized within a r easonable schedule. The direction 
and the timing of simplification will depend on the  developments regarding inflation 
and financial stability. 
19.  Despite experiencing significant external shocks in  recent years, the adopted policy 
framework proved successful in containing the deter ioration in inflation and 
inflation expectations. However, price stability is  yet to be achieved. Ten years of 
experience in inflation targeting showed that comba tting inflation requires joint 
efforts. Thus, to reduce inflation to the 5-percent  target permanently, all institutions 
must fulfill their duties under a holistic approach  by also taking structural factors 
into account. In this respect, actions taken by the  Food Committee set an invaluable 
precedent. In the upcoming period, the CBRT will co ntribute to these efforts by 
undertaking extensive studies to raise awareness re garding structural issues in 
inflation dynamics. 
20.  In the upcoming period, the monetary policy stance will continue to depend on the 
inflation outlook. The CBRT will maintain its cauti ous monetary policy stance by 
taking into account the developments regarding infl ation expectations, the pricing 
behavior and other factors affecting inflation. 
21.  Developments in fiscal policy and tax adjustments a re monitored closely with regard 
to their effects on the inflation outlook. The base line monetary policy stance is 
formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipl ine will be maintained and there 
will be no unanticipated hikes in administered pric es. A revision of the monetary 
policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from 
this framework, and consequently have an adverse ef fect on the medium-term 
inflation outlook. 
22.  In recent years, sustaining fiscal discipline has b ecome one of the major factors in 
reducing the sensitivity of the Turkish economy aga inst external shocks. In the 
current environment of highly uncertain global mark ets, the gains from maintaining 
and further advancing these achievements are signif icant. Any measure to provide 
permanent fiscal discipline and reduction in the sa vings deficit will support 
macroeconomic stability and contribute positively t o social welfare by keeping the 
interest rates of long-term government securities a t low levels. 