   
 
No: 2016-60  
PRESS RELEASE  
December 20, 2016 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Murat Çetinkaya (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Erka n Kilimci, Emrah Şener, Murat Uysal, Abdullah Yavaş . 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to keep the short term interest rates at the  
following levels: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate has  been kept at 8.5 percent and borrowing rate has 
been kept at 7.25 percent, 
b)  One-week repo rate has been kept at 8 percent, 
c)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing rate has been kept 
at 0 percent, and lending rate has been kept at 10 percent. 
Recently released data indicate that the economic a ctivity has decelerated in the third quarter, befor e posting 
a partial recovery for the final quarter. Demand fr om the European Union economies  continues to contribute 
positively to exports.  With the supportive measures and incentives provide d recently, the recovery in the 
economic activity is expected to continue at a mode rate pace. The Committee assesses that the 
implementation of the structural reforms would cont ribute to the potential growth significantly. 
Exchange rate movements due to recently heightened global uncertainty and the increase in oil prices p ose 
upside risks on the inflation outlook. Yet, the agg regate demand developments restrain these effects. 
Developments will be closely monitored in order to make a sound assessment regarding the net impact of  
these factors. 
Future monetary policy decisions will be conditiona l on the inflation outlook. Inflation expectations,  pricing 
behavior and other factors affecting inflation will  be closely monitored and the cautious monetary pol icy 
stance will be maintained. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five working days. 
 
