   
 
No: 2016-17  
PRESS RELEASE  
26 April 2016 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 20 April 2016       
Inflation Developments 
1.  In March, consumer prices edged down by 0.04 percen t, and annual inflation 
dropped by 1.32 points to 7.46 percent. As also sta ted in the Summary of the March 
MPC Meeting, this fall in inflation stemmed from un processed food prices. In this 
period, annual inflation in core indicators recorde d a slight fall, while the underlying 
trend continued to improve on the back of the core goods group. 
2.  Annual inflation in the food and non-alcoholic beve rages group fell by 4.25 points to 
4.58 percent. This was mainly driven by unprocessed  food prices, the annual inflation 
of which plunged to 0.22 percent due to prices of f resh fruits and vegetables. On the 
processed food front, annual inflation sustained th e uptrend due to the price 
developments in the bread-cereals group but with a diminishing pace.  Meanwhile, 
leading indicators hint at a notable decline in unp rocessed food annual inflation in 
April as well. On the energy front, prices rose by 0.60 percent due mainly to 
international oil prices, while annual inflation de creased to 1.83 percent due to the 
base effect.  
3.  Prices of services increased by 0.38 percent, and t he annual services inflation 
receded by 0.20 point to 8.86 percent in March. Ann ual inflation decreased in the 
other services and restaurants-hotels groups, but i ncreased in remaining subgroups. 
The underlying trend of services prices remained at  high levels, which is attributed to 
high levels of inflation expectations and the prici ng behavior as well as increased 
costs amid wage developments and cumulative exchang e rate effects.  
4.  Annual core goods inflation edged down by 0.24 poin ts to 10.13 percent in March. 
Having increased since September, the annual clothi ng inflation recorded a decline in 
this period. Owing to the decelerating cumulative e xchange rate effects, core goods 
excluding clothing saw a further decline in annual inflation, albeit limited. In addition, 
the recent stable course of the Turkish lira led to  an improvement in the underlying 
trend of core goods inflation. 
 5.  In sum, inflation has recently recorded a notable d ecline. Driven mainly by the 
unprocessed food group, this decline is expected to  continue in the short term. 
Despite the fall in inflation, the Committee stated  that the improvement in core 
inflation was limited. 
Factors Affecting Inflation  
6.  According to the TurkStat, Gross Domestic Product ( GDP) rose by a quarterly 0.7 
percent and a yearly 5.7 percent in the fourth quar ter of 2015. Thus, the economy 
grew by 4.0 percent in 2015. On the production side , the industrial value-added 
made the greatest contribution to quarterly growth in the last quarter. Finance and 
insurance activities accounted for most of the serv ices value-added over the year. 
Meanwhile, the noticeable agricultural value-added growth and rise in net taxes 
upon the increasing production of petroleum product s made a significant 
contribution to growth throughout the year. On the expenditure side, investment 
spending was the main driver of final domestic dema nd in quarterly terms. In this 
period, consumer spending slowed and external deman d declined. In sum, 2015 was 
marked as a year with faster private consumption gr owth than the GDP growth, 
recovering capital accumulation and contracted exte rnal demand. 
7.  Data for the first quarter of 2016 suggest that eco nomic activity remains on the rise. 
Industrial production increased by 1.6 percent duri ng January-February period 
relative to the previous quarter’s average. Given t he external trade outlook and 
survey data for March, industrial production is exp ected to expand further in the first 
quarter. 
8.  Data on spending side point to a moderate domestic demand in the first quarter. 
Among indicators of private consumption, the produc tion and imports of consumer 
goods rose in the January-February period. Likewise , sales of automobiles, home 
appliances, and homes were up. On the investment si de, the production of capital 
goods dropped whereas their imports increased. Yet,  the production of nonmetallic 
minerals expanded while their imports receded. Sale s of commercial vehicles were 
also down in the first quarter. Accordingly, it is assessed that private consumer 
spending was more robust than investments, and priv ate consumption was the main 
driver of domestic demand in the first quarter. 
9.  Favorable developments in the terms of trade accomp anied by the moderate course 
of consumer loans support the recovery in the curre nt account balance. The growing 
EU demand and Turkey’s high market-shifting flexibi lity limit downside risks caused 
by geopolitical developments. Thus, amid continued EU demand growth, low 
commodity prices, and ongoing macroprudential polic ies, the current account 
balance is expected to improve further. 
10.  Seasonally-adjusted unemployment rates were down on  a month-on-month basis in 
January 2016, due to the increase in nonfarm employ ment and decline in labor 
supply. Across sub-sectors, services provided the l argest contribution to nonfarm  employment growth, while construction employment al so increased. Industrial 
employment, on the other hand, was slightly down in  January for the second month 
in a row. In view of production and survey indicato rs, employment is expected to 
remain on a modest track in the short term. 
11.  To sum up, current indicators suggest that the econ omy continues to grow at a 
steady and moderate pace. In the upcoming period, d omestic demand is likely to be 
supported by the income channel through wage increa ses and low oil prices. 
Although geopolitical developments pose a downside risk, the growing EU demand 
continues to stimulate exports. 
Monetary Policy and Risks  
12.  The Committee discussed the medium-term projections  to be published in the April 
Inflation Report. In the first quarter of 2016, inf lation remained below the projections 
of the January Inflation Report mainly due to unpro cessed food prices. However, 
inflation excluding unprocessed food and tobacco wa s close to the January forecast 
in this period. Considering the assumptions underly ing the forecasts and the course 
of exogenous variables, inflation forecasts for the  upcoming period were left 
unchanged from the previous report. After the Janua ry Inflation Report, the Turkish 
lira remained stable while oil prices inched up and  import prices edged down slightly. 
Accordingly, the impact of TL import prices was not  significant enough to lead to any 
change in the inflation forecasts. Despite the rece ntly slumping unprocessed food 
inflation, assumptions for food inflation are prese rved given high volatility in food 
prices.  
13.  Annual loan growth continues at reasonable levels i n response to the tight monetary 
policy stance and macroprudential measures. After s lowing down in the fourth 
quarter of 2015, particularly for consumer loans, t he growth trend of loans picked up 
in the first quarter of 2016. Risk weight and minim um wage arrangements and 
improving financial conditions are likely to boost loan growth in the upcoming period 
via loan supply and household income channels. Thus , annual loan growth rates are 
expected to remain at reasonable levels. With respe ct to the composition of loans, 
commercial loans continue to grow faster than consu mer loans. This composition not 
only limits medium-term inflationary pressures but also supports the improvement in 
the current account balance.  
14.  Recent data and the leading indicators show that ec onomic activity displays a 
moderate and stable course of growth. In the forthc oming period, domestic demand 
is likely to contribute more strongly to growth whi le the growing EU demand will 
further stimulate exports in spite of geopolitical risks. Strengthened investor and 
consumer confidence driven by reduced domestic unce rtainties, recently improved 
financial conditions, robust post-global-crisis emp loyment performance, and the 
early 2016 minimum wage hike are all expected to su pport domestic demand. On the 
foreign demand front, geopolitical developments and  weaker global growth continue 
to pose downside risks, with those to exports of se rvices recently being on the rise.  Nevertheless, the economic recovery in Europe and t he market-shifting flexibility of 
our exports cap these downside risks. In fact, the rising EU demand has had a 
favorable effect on exports recently, which is cond ucive for both economic growth 
and rebalancing prospects. Moreover, improvements i n the terms of trade mainly led 
by the cumulative fall in commodity prices, coupled  with the modest course of 
consumer loans, support the improvement in the curr ent account balance. Against 
this background, the monetary policy stance is base d on an outlook, where economic 
activity will remain on a moderate growth path whil e the current account deficit will 
narrow further, albeit at a slower pace.  
15.  The Committee assesses that the effective use of th e policy tools announced in the 
road map of August 2015 bolsters the resilience of the economy against global 
shocks. The introduction of these new instruments h elped to curb the excessive 
volatility in both exchange rates and credits. In f act, the relative volatility of the 
Turkish lira has decreased notably since September compared to other emerging 
market currencies. This process is supported by the  gradually falling demand for 
foreign exchange amid the improving current account  balance and lower energy 
prices. Also, foreign currency liquidity instrument s are used to stabilize the value of 
the Turkish lira. All these developments alleviate the need for a wide interest rate 
corridor.  
16.  Other factors that have recently reduced the need f or a wide interest rate corridor 
are the continued decline in global volatility and the improving global financial 
conditions. Mounting prospects of a slow global eco nomic recovery and the 
sustained monetary easing by advanced economy centr al banks have recently 
fostered the expectations of a prolonged period of low interest rates across 
advanced economies. Accordingly, capital flows into  emerging economies increased 
while risk premiums and market interest rates fell significantly.  
17.  In sum, the recent lasting decline in global volati lity and the effective use of the 
policy instruments laid out in the road map announc ed in August 2015 have reduced 
the need for a wide interest rate corridor. Thus, t he Committee decided to take a 
measured step towards simplification by lowering th e marginal funding rate. 
18.  On the other hand, the improvement in the underlyin g core inflation trend remains 
limited, necessitating the maintenance of the tight  liquidity policy stance. Although 
recent developments regarding imported input costs have eased the upside risks to 
the inflation outlook, the improvement in core infl ation is still limited. The lagged 
effects of cumulative exchange rate movements, high  levels of inflation expectations 
and wage developments restrain the improvement in t he underlying trend of 
inflation. Food inflation has recently seen a marke d decline on the back of 
unprocessed food prices. The falling food inflation  led to a decrease in consumer 
inflation as well, which is expected to continue in  the short run. Yet, given the high 
volatility in unprocessed food prices, it is import ant to remain cautious about the 
inflation outlook. Hence, the Committee stated that  the current tight liquidity stance  should be maintained in order to ensure that the re cently observed disinflation 
becomes permanent. 
19.  In the upcoming period, monetary policy stance will  be conditional on the inflation 
outlook. Taking into account inflation expectations , the pricing behavior and the 
course of other factors affecting inflation, the ti ght monetary policy stance will be 
maintained. Moreover, global and domestic volatilit ies will be monitored closely and 
necessary measures will be taken for the foreign ex change and Turkish lira markets. 
In sum, the policy stance will remain tight against  the inflation outlook, stabilizing for 
the FX liquidity and supportive of the financial st ability. 
20.  Notwithstanding the significant external shocks in recent years, the current policy 
framework limited the worsening in inflation and in flation expectations. However, 
price stability is yet to be achieved. Ten years of  experience with inflation targeting 
has shown that the fight against inflation requires  collaboration from all relevant 
parties. Therefore, bringing inflation permanently down to the 5-percent target 
requires all institutions to continue resolutely wi th the efforts made in recent years. 
21.  Developments in the fiscal policy and tax adjustmen ts are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. T he baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal disc ipline will be maintained and there 
will be no unanticipated hikes in administered pric es. A revision of the monetary 
policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from 
this framework, and consequently have an adverse ef fect on the medium-term 
inflation outlook. 
22.  Sustained fiscal discipline has become a fundamenta l element in reducing the 
sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external  shocks in recent years. In the 
current environment of highly uncertain global mark ets, the value added from 
maintaining and further advancing these achievement s is significant. Any measure 
that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings 
deficit will support macroeconomic stability and co ntribute positively to social 
welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term gove rnment securities at low levels. 