   
 
No: 2016-41  
PRESS RELEASE  
29 September 2016 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date:  22 September 2016 
 
Inflation Developments 
1.  In August, consumer prices decreased by 0.29 percen t, and annual consumer 
inflation went down by 0.74 points to 8.05 percent.  As stated in the Summary of the 
Monetary Policy Committee Meeting of August, this f all was driven by the correction 
in the unprocessed food prices. Prices of tobacco p roducts, on the other hand, 
manifested the dragged effect of the July correctio n in August. In this period, core 
indicators saw a decline in annual inflation, but a  slight increase in underlying trends 
driven by core goods. 
2.  Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverage s tumbled down to 6.19 percent 
due mainly to the decline in the prices of fresh fr uits and vegetables. Meanwhile, 
inflation in food items excluding fresh fruits and vegetables has exhibited a 
favorable course lately. Leading indicators regardi ng September hint at a prolonged 
downward correction in unprocessed food inflation. On the energy front, prices 
declined on account of the falling fuel prices. Ann ual energy inflation climbed to 
2.97 percent due to the base effect. In September, lump-sum SCT applied to fuel 
products was raised, which is expected to have dire ct effect on consumer inflation 
by 0.3 points. 
3.  Prices of services increased by 0.71 percent, and t he annual services inflation fell by 
0.46 points to 8.09 percent in August. Annual infla tion decreased in all sub-groups 
except rents in this period. The fall in annual inf lation was driven by the favorable 
course of food prices in addition to the inflation in the prices of restaurant-hotel 
services that lost pace due to the base effect. The  surge in unit labor costs in the 
first half of the year played a significant role in  the high course of services inflation, 
while the slowdown in the tourism sector restricts these effects to some extent. In 
this respect, the underlying trend of services infl ation exhibits a limited 
deceleration. 
 4.  Annual core goods inflation fell by 0.15 points to 8.67 percent in August.  Annual 
inflation crept up in durable goods, but decreased in other groups. Lagged effects of 
the exchange rate on annual core goods inflation di splay a gradual decline. 
However, following the July depreciation in the Tur kish lira, the underlying trend in 
core goods exhibited a slight increase in this peri od. 
5.  In sum, the slowdown in aggregate demand contribute s to the gradual fall in core 
inflation. With the help of falling food prices, he adline inflation is expected to 
display a decline in the short term. However, the r ecent tax adjustment in fuel prices 
and other cost factors limit the improvement in inf lation. 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
6.  Second-quarter TurkStat data indicate that the GDP grew by an annual 3.1 percent. 
Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, growth has lost some momentum in the 
second quarter, up only by 0.3 percent after seeing  a modest 0.7 percent increase in 
the first quarter. Investments remained sluggish wh ile private and public spending 
provided a major boost to growth. The spillovers of  the tourism slump became more 
pervasive in the second quarter, causing net export s to have a heightened negative 
impact on growth. 
7.  Recent data releases and indicators for the third q uarter point to a deceleration in 
economic activity. Calendar and seasonally-adjusted  industrial production dipped 
both monthly and annually due to the domestic turbu lence of July and the extended 
Ramadan holiday. This plunge is in part attributed to both the loss of working days 
caused by this holiday extension (bridge-day effect s) and the drop in effective 
working days following July 15. In fact, recent ind icators suggest that the recovery in 
August and September partly compensated for July’s output loss. Nevertheless, 
third-quarter industrial production is expected to be lower than in the second 
quarter. 
8.  The increased EU demand continues to foster exports . Despite geopolitically-driven 
negative effects on external demand, Turkey’s flexi bility in market diversification 
remains supportive of exports. Recent data on exter nal trade signal that non-gold 
exports were up in August, offsetting the July desc ent. Yet, spillovers from the 
troubled tourism industry into net exports were mor e pronounced in the summer 
months. The tourism slump is likely to have a short -lived negative impact on the 
current account balance, but the lagged pass-throug h of terms-of-trade 
developments and the moderate course of consumer lo ans help to improve the 
current account balance. Meanwhile, commodity price s are expected to become 
gradually less accommodative for the current accoun t deficit in the coming months. 
9.  In June, seasonally-adjusted unemployment rates wer e up month-on-month due to 
narrowing non-farm employment. Thus, with the deter iorating employment 
outlook, unemployment rates jumped for the second m onth in a row. The 
employment decline spread across all industries. In dustrial and construction  employment dropped while services employment saw a weakening growth. In light 
of actual data and leading indicators, unemployment  rates are anticipated to surge 
in the third quarter. Moreover, the SSI data indica te that the stagnant tourism 
industry continues to weigh on services employment as of June. 
10.  In sum, economic activity is expected to post a qua rterly fall in the third quarter. 
However, it is envisaged that the negative impact o f the downturn in tourism on 
growth will be more restricted and domestic demand will start to recover on the 
back of accommodative incentives and measures. 
Monetary Policy and Risks  
11.  The Committee assesses that current financial condi tions are tight. The rise in global 
risk appetite helps to ease financial conditions, b ut loan standards remain tight. The 
gradual fall in the marginal funding rate partly pa ssed through into loan and deposit 
rates. Loans are likely to see a moderate recovery over the upcoming period with 
the support coming from accommodative macroprudenti al measures. 
12.  Recently released data and indicators regarding the  third quarter display a 
deceleration in the economic activity. Unemployment  rates which have been on the 
rise for the second consecutive month due to the wo rsening employment outlook 
confirm the economic slowdown. However, leading ind icators imply that the 
significant slowdown in industrial production obser ved in July is not permanent. 
Despite the adverse effects of geopolitical develop ments on external demand, 
exports of goods to EU members remain strong. Resto red relations with Russia may 
also support external demand gradually. Accordingly , exports of goods are expected 
to provide further contributions to growth in the u pcoming period. Domestic 
demand is likely to start recovering by the fourth quarter on account of 
accommodative incentives and measures. 
13.  In terms of global economic developments, low level s of advanced economy interest 
rates and commodity prices continue to affect the T urkish economy favorably. 
Although the uncertainty over global monetary polic ies have somewhat heightened, 
emerging economies continue to attract portfolio in flows.  
14.  In light of these developments and considering its contribution to the effectiveness 
of monetary policy, the Committee decided to take a  measured and prudent step 
towards simplification. The ultimate aim of simplif ication is to achieve a narrow and 
symmetrical corridor and provide funding via a sing le rate. The simplification of the 
monetary policy is planned to be finalized within a  reasonable schedule. The pace 
and timing of simplification will depend on the dev elopments regarding inflation 
and financial stability. 
15.  Inflation was down in August owing to improving ind icators for unprocessed food 
and core inflation. The lagged effects of cumulativ e exchange rate movements on 
annual inflation eased further. However, the implic ations of the Turkish lira’s July 
depreciation for core goods and the pressures from unit labor costs and rigidities on  services caused the underlying core inflation to re main high. In spite of gains from 
lower imported-input costs, the underlying inflatio n improved only marginally. For 
the upcoming period, the slowing aggregate demand m ay contribute to the gradual 
decline in core inflation while falling food prices  are expected to pull inflation down 
in the short term. Nevertheless, adjustments in fue l taxes and other cost-related 
developments put upward pressure on inflation and r equire the maintenance of a 
cautious monetary policy stance. 
16.  In the upcoming period, the monetary policy stance will be conditional on the 
inflation outlook. Taking into account inflation ex pectations, the pricing behavior 
and the course of other factors affecting inflation , the cautious monetary policy 
stance will be maintained. 
17.  Developments in the fiscal policy and tax adjustmen ts are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. T he baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal disc ipline will be maintained and 
there will be no unanticipated hikes in administere d prices. A revision of the 
monetary policy stance may be considered should the  fiscal policy deviate 
significantly from this framework, and consequently  have an adverse effect on the 
medium-term inflation outlook. 
18.  Sustained fiscal discipline has become essential in  reducing the sensitivity of the 
Turkish economy against external shocks in recent y ears. In the current environment 
of highly uncertain global markets, the gains from maintaining and further 
advancing these achievements are significant. Any m easure to provide permanent 
fiscal discipline and reduction in the savings defi cit will support macroeconomic 
stability and contribute positively to social welfa re by keeping interest rates of long-
term government securities at low levels. 
 
 
 
 