1 
   
 
No: 2016-61  
Press Release  
27 December 2016 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 20 December 2016 
Inflation Developments      
1.  In November, consumer prices went up by 0.52 percen t, while annual consumer 
inflation fell by 0.16 points to 7.0 percent. As st ated in the Summary of the 
Monetary Policy Committee Meeting of November, annu al food inflation receded 
considerably, while energy inflation increased due to the depreciation in the Turkish 
lira. On the other hand, the effect of recent excha nge rate movements on core 
inflation indicators remained relatively limited du e to the slowdown in aggregate 
demand. Thus, the underlying trends of core indicat ors displayed a practically flat 
course. 
 
2.  Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverage s fell by 1.65 points to 3.55 
percent, which was led by the falling unprocessed f ood prices due to the decline in 
the prices of vegetables. Annual processed food inf lation remained on the decline. 
Leading indicators regarding December suggest an up tick in annual food inflation on 
account of the unprocessed food inflation. Energy p rices increased by 1.05 points in 
November and the depreciation in the Turkish lira r esulted in overall price hikes in 
the sector. Thus, annual energy inflation rose by 1 .44 points to 6.15 percent. This 
rise is expected to continue in December due to the  uptrend in the exchange rate 
coupled with oil prices. In addition to food and en ergy groups, recent tax 
adjustments introduced to some items, chiefly tobac co products, is envisaged to put 
a noticeable upside pressure on December inflation.   
 
3.  Prices of services recorded an uptick by 0.29 perce nt, and annual services inflation 
crept up by 0.14 points to 7.94 percent in November . Annual inflation decreased in 
transport and rent, but increased in other sub-grou ps in this period. Consequences 
of the slowdown in domestic demand and the tourism sector were evident in the 
prices of services, while some groups reflected the  effect of depreciation of the 
2 
 Turkish lira as well. In this respect, the underlyi ng trend of services inflation 
registered a slight increase .  
4.  Annual core goods inflation inched down by 0.22 poi nts to 5.92 percent in 
November. Inflation plummeted in the clothing group , but increased in durable 
goods. Recent exchange rate developments had a limi ted effect on durable goods in 
November. This month was marked by a notable deprec iation in the Turkish lira, 
while aggregate demand conditions confined the dete rioration in the underlying 
trend of core goods inflation. 
 
5.  In sum, the effect of the recent rise in exchange r ate and oil prices on inflation 
remained relatively limited due to aggregate demand  conditions.  
 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
6.  The GDP narrowed by 1.8 percent year-on-year in the  third quarter and grew by 2.2 
percent through the first nine months of 2016. The Committee assessed that the 
underlying growth of economic activity is not as sl ow as third-quarter GDP data 
suggest. In fact, mid-July incidents and the loss o f working days caused by extended 
religious holidays had far more implications than n ormal calendar effects. Adjusted 
for such effects, the economy is estimated to regis ter a year-on-year expansion 
rather than a contraction in the third quarter.   
 
 
7.  In the third quarter, value-added was up in constru ction but down in agriculture, 
industry and services on a yearly basis. On the spe nding front, public consumption 
provided further support to growth. Meanwhile, cons truction investments 
contributed to annual growth positively whereas mac hinery and equipment 
investments and private spending declined. Domestic  demand continued to prop up 
growth, albeit to a lesser extent, while the effect s of the tourism slump became 
more pronounced and net exports provided an increas ed negative contribution to 
growth.  
 
 
8.  Recent data indicate that economic activity rebound ed somewhat in the fourth 
quarter after the third-quarter deceleration. With working day losses led by 
extended religious holidays counterbalanced and the  underlying trend on a modest 
upward track, industrial output increased in Octobe r. Data on the production and 
exports of electricity and vehicles point to furthe r growth in industrial output for 
November. Thus, industrial production is likely to post a quarterly gain in the fourth 
quarter thanks to the base effect from unworked day s. However, apart from the 3 
 very much technical recovery driven by working day effects, the economy recovery 
seems to be a moderate one yet to spread across all  sectors.  
 
 
9.  Economic activity is expected to recover further am id accommodative incentives 
and measures. This estimation is supported by the d ata on mortgage and auto 
markets. Thanks to more accommodative monetary cond itions and other newly-
adopted measures, consumer loans have picked up in recent months, bolstering the 
prospects for a gradual improvement. Moreover, the public sector is expected to 
provide further investment support to growth in the  coming months. 
 
10.  The growing EU demand continues to stimulate total exports, the auto industry in 
particular. Turkey’s flexibility in market diversif ication continues to cushion exports 
against the negative effects of geopolitical tensio ns on external demand. 
Furthermore, the newly-restored relations with Russ ia translated into a boost for 
exports. The gloomy tourism industry continues to h ave a negative impact on the 
current account balance, which, however, is allevia ted by the lagged pass-through of 
terms-of-trade developments and the moderate course  of loans. However, 
commodity prices are expected to become gradually l ess accommodative for the 
current account deficit in the upcoming period. 
 
11.  The labor market decline that began in May paused i n September amid rising 
nonfarm employment. The growth in nonfarm employmen t was mostly driven by 
the increased construction employment. Meanwhile, s ervices and industrial 
employment picked up only modestly. Leading indicat ors such as new job vacancies 
and unemployment insurance claims suggest that empl oyment remains subdued 
and unemployment rates will remain at high levels.   
 
12.  In sum, economic activity edged up in the fourth qu arter and is expected to record a 
moderate growth in 2016. However, the potential imp act of recent global and 
geopolitical developments on financial conditions a nd the lack of any signs of a rosy 
tourism outlook remain a downside risk to the pace of economic recovery.   
 
Monetary Policy and Risks  
13.  Consumer loans continue to improve amid falling int erest rates and 
macroprudential measures. Nevertheless, due to glob al and geopolitical spillovers 
into domestic financial markets, commercial loans r emain weak. Measures taken by 4 
 the Economic Coordination Committee to uplift the r eal sector are expected to help 
commercial loans increase in the upcoming period.    
 
14.  The ongoing uncertainty over global monetary polici es and enhanced Fed rate hike 
prospects lead to financial market volatility and p ortfolio outflows in emerging 
economies. To counteract their negative spillovers into exchange rates and lending 
standards, the CBRT maintains a stabilizing stance for FX liquidity and a supportive 
macroprudential policy stance.  
 
15.  Domestic demand is expected to start recovering by the fourth quarter amid 
accommodative incentives and measures. Yet, global market turmoil and 
geopolitical risks keep a firm lid on the pace of e conomic recovery. Thus, economic 
activity is likely to grow moderately in the upcomi ng period. The CBRT will continue 
to monitor the developments in economic activity an d their implications for price 
stability and financial stability. The Committee st ated that adopting structural 
reforms might boost the economy’s growth potential to a large extent. 
 
16.  Exchange rate movements and rising oil prices fuele d by the recently heightened 
global uncertainty pose an upside risk to the infla tion outlook. Recent price 
movements and current weather forecasts add to the upside risks to food prices for 
the coming months, which, however, are curbed by ag gregate demand. The 
Committee agreed that future developments should be  closely monitored to 
determine the net effects of these factors on the i nflation outlook for 2017. 
 
17.  Against this background, the Committee kept the mar ginal funding rate constant in 
December and maintains its position that the simpli fication should be completed 
within an appropriate time frame. The gains that we re planned through 
simplification are performing to a great extent. Th e direction and the timing of the 
next step toward simplification will depend on the developments in inflation and 
financial stability.  
 
18.  Monetary policy decisions will depend on the inflat ion outlook in the upcoming 
period. The CBRT will maintain its cautious stance in light of future developments in 
inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and ot her factors affecting inflation. 
 
19.  Developments in fiscal policy and tax adjustments a re monitored closely with regard 
to their effects on the inflation outlook. The base line monetary policy stance is 
formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipl ine will be maintained and there 5 
 will be no unanticipated hikes in administered pric es. A revision of the monetary 
policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from 
this framework, and consequently have an adverse ef fect on the medium-term 
inflation outlook. 
 
20.  In recent years, sustaining fiscal discipline has b ecome one of the major factors in 
reducing the sensitivity of the Turkish economy aga inst external shocks. In the 
current environment of high global uncertainty, it is critical to maintain and further 
enhance these achievements. Any measure to provide permanent fiscal discipline 
and to reduce the savings deficit will support macr oeconomic stability and 
contribute positively to social welfare by keeping the interest rates of long-term 
government securities at low levels.  
 
 