   
 
No: 2016-21  
PRESS RELEASE  
31 May 2016 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 24 May 2016       
Inflation Developments 
1.  In April, consumer prices rose by 0.78 percent, and  annual inflation dropped by 0.89 
points to 6.57 percent. Consumer inflation declined  further on the back of 
unprocessed food prices. In this period, annual inf lation in core indicators remained 
high, while their underlying trend continued to imp rove. 
2.  Annual inflation in the food and non-alcoholic beve rages group fell by 3.20 points to 
1.38 percent. The deceleration in food inflation wa s mainly driven by unprocessed 
food prices, the annual inflation of which plunged to -5.94 percent. In this group, 
prices of fresh fruits and vegetables remained belo w the previous year’s levels due to 
increased supply of products, whereas red meat pric es exhibit a mild outlook amid 
the measures in effect. On the other hand, processe d food inflation sustained its high 
course also due to prices in the bread-cereals grou p. On the energy front, prices rose 
by 0.34 percent in line with international oil pric es, while annual inflation sustained 
the mild outlook with 1.74 percent. 
3.  Prices of services increased by 0.64 percent, and t he annual services inflation edged 
down by 0.10 point to 8.76 percent in April. Being the culprit of high figures in 
services inflation, the restaurants-hotels and othe r services groups lost pace in the 
last couple of months. The mild course in food pric es reflected favorably on prices in 
the restaurants-hotels group, and the attenuated cu mulative depreciation in the 
Turkish lira underpins the slowdown in inflation in  other services. On the other hand, 
inflation in transport services continued with an u ptrend and rent inflation rose to 
8.39 percent. All in all, despite some deceleration , the underlying trend of services 
prices remained high. 
4.  Annual core goods inflation remained flat with 10.1 1 percent in April. Annual 
inflation recorded an increase in the clothing grou p, but edged down in others. Prices 
of durable goods registered a modest monthly increa se by 0.43 percent, yet the 
uptrend in subgroups like furniture and white goods  proved notable. The underlying 
trend of core goods weakened further, and when clot hing is excluded, the 
 improvement is more remarkable. Amid the decelerati ng cumulative exchange rate 
effects, annual core goods inflation is projected t o slow in the second half of the year. 
5.  In sum, inflation has recently recorded a notable d ecline driven mainly by the 
unprocessed food prices. Despite the fall in inflat ion, the Committee stated that the 
improvement in the underlying core inflation trend remains limited. 
Factors Affecting Inflation  
6.  Data for the first quarter of 2016 suggest that eco nomic activity remains on the rise. 
Up by 1.5 percent from the previous quarter’s avera ge, industrial production 
recorded the largest increase since the first quart er of 2014. Production of basic 
pharmaceuticals made the greatest contribution to q uarterly growth, while main 
industries such as food, clothing and textiles also  contributed to growth, which is a 
favorable development. In addition, the steady incr ease in the exports to the EU is 
another factor supporting industrial production gro wth.  
7.  Data on spending side point to a rising domestic de mand for the first quarter. Among 
indicators of private consumption, the production a nd imports of consumer goods 
grew robustly. Likewise, sales of automobiles, home  appliances and homes were up 
in the first quarter. On the investment side, the p roduction of capital goods dropped 
whereas their imports increased. The production of capital goods declined due to 
vehicle manufacturing, yet vehicles excluded, it po sted a rise. Moreover, both the 
warmer-than-normal weather in winter months and the  upsurge in the production 
and imports of nonmetallic minerals suggest some in crease in construction activities 
for the first quarter. Against this background, it is assessed that private consumer 
spending was more robust than investments, and priv ate consumption was the main 
driver of domestic demand in the first quarter. 
8.  Favorable developments in the terms of trade accomp anied by the moderate course 
of consumer loans support the recovery in the curre nt account balance. The growing 
EU demand continues to support exports. High market -shifting flexibility of exports 
limits downside risks caused by geopolitical develo pments. Thus, amid continued EU 
demand growth, low commodity prices and ongoing mac roprudential policies, the 
current account balance is expected to improve furt her. Yet, the falling number of 
foreign visitors weighs on revenues from services, posing a downside risk to the 
current account deficit.  
9.  Seasonally-adjusted unemployment rates were down mo nth-on-month in February 
2016, due to the weakening labor supply and the mod erate gain in nonfarm 
employment. Across sub-sectors, services provided t he largest contribution to 
nonfarm employment growth, while construction emplo yment continued to expand. 
Meanwhile, industrial employment continued to drop slightly in February. In view of 
production and survey indicators, employment is exp ected to remain on a modest 
track in the short term. This labor market outlook is likely to spur growth in 2016.   10.  In sum, current indicators suggest that the economy  continues to grow at a moderate 
and steady pace. In the upcoming period, the income  channel is likely to push 
domestic demand higher through wage increases and a  food price-driven decline in 
headline inflation. Although geopolitical developme nts continue to pose downside 
risks, the growing EU demand continues to support e xports, and thus production.  
Monetary Policy and Risks  
11.  Annual loan growth continues at reasonable levels i n response to the tight monetary 
policy stance and macroprudential measures. Risk we ight and minimum wage 
arrangements are expected to boost loan growth furt her in the upcoming period via 
loan supply and household income channels. Thus, an nual loan growth rates are 
likely to remain at reasonable levels. With respect  to the composition of loans, 
commercial loans continue to grow faster than consu mer loans. This composition not 
only limits medium-term inflationary pressures but also supports the improvement in 
the current account balance.  
12.  Economic activity remains on a moderate and steady growth track. In the first 
quarter, industrial production recorded a robust qu arter-on-quarter increase while 
external demand supported growth. In the forthcomin g period, domestic demand is 
expected to provide further support to growth while  the rising EU demand will 
continue to promote exports. Employment remained on  a moderate upward path in 
the first quarter. Given wage developments, employm ent growth is likely to support 
domestic demand further through the income channel.  On the external demand side, 
geopolitical tensions and the weakening global grow th continued to pose risks, and 
risks to services exports became prevalent. However , the European economic 
recovery and the market-shifting flexibility of exp orts alleviate the downside risks to 
external balance. Moreover, the favorable impact of  the cumulative fall in 
commodity prices on the terms of trade and the mode rate course of consumer loans 
contribute to the improvement in the current accoun t balance.  
13.  Recently, the global volatility has increased to so me extent amid ongoing concerns 
over global growth and continued uncertainty about global monetary policies. 
Accordingly, emerging-market portfolio flows slowed  slightly while risk premiums and 
exchange rate volatilities recorded increases. The Committee assesses that the tight 
monetary policy stance, the cautious macroprudentia l policies and the effective use 
of the policy instruments laid out in the road map published in August 2015 enhance 
the resilience of the economy against shocks. These  policy measures have tamed the 
heightened volatility in both exchange rates and lo ans. In fact, the Turkish lira has 
followed a relatively less volatile path than other  emerging market currencies since 
September 2015. Against this backdrop, the Committe e decided to take a measured 
step towards simplification by lowering the margina l funding rate. Moreover, within 
the context of the road map, related departments ma de presentations about the 
arrangements that would increase the predictability  of liquidity policy and make 
liquidity management of banks more efficient.  14.  On the other hand, the improvement in the underlyin g core inflation trend remains 
limited, necessitating the maintenance of the tight  liquidity policy stance. Although 
low imported-input costs have eased the upside risk s to the inflation outlook, the 
improvement in core inflation is still limited. The  weakening yet ongoing lagged 
effects of cumulative exchange rate movements, high  levels of inflation expectations 
and wage developments restrain the improvement in t he underlying trend of 
inflation. Food inflation has recently seen a marke d decline on the back of 
unprocessed food prices. The falling food inflation  led to a decrease in consumer 
inflation as well. Yet, given the elevated core inf lation, it is important to remain 
cautious about the inflation outlook. To this end, the Committee stated that the 
current tight liquidity stance should be maintained  in order to ensure that the 
recently observed disinflation becomes permanent.  
15.  In the upcoming period, the monetary policy stance will be conditional on the 
inflation outlook. Taking into account inflation ex pectations, the pricing behavior and 
the course of other factors affecting inflation, th e tight monetary policy stance will be 
maintained. Moreover, global and domestic volatilit ies will be monitored closely and 
necessary measures will be taken for the foreign ex change and Turkish lira markets. 
In sum, the policy stance will remain tight against  the inflation outlook, stabilizing for 
the FX liquidity and supportive of financial stabil ity. 
16.  Developments in the fiscal policy and tax adjustmen ts are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. T he baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal disc ipline will be maintained and there 
will be no unanticipated hikes in administered pric es. A revision of the monetary 
policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from 
this framework, and consequently have an adverse ef fect on the medium-term 
inflation outlook. 
17.  Sustained fiscal discipline has become a fundamenta l element in reducing the 
sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external  shocks in recent years. In the 
current environment of highly uncertain global mark ets, the value added from 
maintaining and further advancing these achievement s is significant. Any measure 
that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings 
deficit will support macroeconomic stability and co ntribute positively to social 
welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term gove rnment securities at low levels. 