   
 
No: 2016-53  
PRESS RELEASE  
November 24, 2016 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Murat Çetinkaya (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Erka n Kilimci, Emrah Şener, Murat Uysal, Abdullah Yavaş . 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to set the short term interest rates at the 
following levels: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate has  been increased from 8.25 percent to 8.5 
percent, and borrowing rate has been kept at 7.25 p ercent, 
b)  One-week repo rate has been increased from 7.5 perc ent to 8 percent, 
c)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing rate has been kept 
at 0 percent, and lending rate has been increased f rom 9.75 percent to 10 percent. 
Recently released data indicate a deceleration in t he economic activity for the third quarter. Meanwhi le, 
demand from the European Union economies  continues to contribute positively to exports.  With the 
supportive measures and incentives provided recentl y, economic activity is expected to recover startin g from 
the final quarter. The Committee assesses that the implementation of the structural reforms would cont ribute 
to the potential growth significantly. 
The slowdown in aggregate demand contributes to the  fall in inflation. Yet, exchange rate movements du e to 
recently heightened global uncertainty and volatili ty pose upside risks on the inflation outlook. The Committee 
decided to implement monetary tightening to contain  adverse impact of these developments on expectatio ns 
and the pricing behavior.  
Future monetary policy decisions will be conditiona l on the inflation outlook. Inflation expectations,  pricing 
behavior and other factors affecting inflation will  be closely monitored and the cautious monetary pol icy 
stance will be maintained.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five working days. 
 
