1 
   
 
No: 2016-11  
PRESS RELEASE  
1 March 2016 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 23 February 2016 
Inflation Developments 
1.  In January, consumer prices edged up by 1.82 percen t, and annual inflation rose by 
0.77 points to 9.58 percent. This rise in inflation  is attributed to the products with 
administered prices and unprocessed food prices. Th e total effect of adjustments in 
certain products with administered prices in early January amounted to 0.7 points, 
as projected. Core goods inflation continued to ris e, and services inflation 
maintained its high level. Accordingly, annual infl ation of core indicators recorded 
an increase, while their underlying trend improved slightly. 
2.  Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverage s rose by 0.82 points to 11.69 
percent. This was mainly driven by unprocessed food  prices that increased due to 
the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables. Annual i nflation reached 20.09 percent in 
this sub-group, while that in unprocessed food hit 15.33 percent. On the processed 
food front, annual inflation increased to 8.41 perc ent amid the price developments 
in bread-cereals group in the last two months. Lead ing indicators for February 
suggest a downtrend in food inflation. 
3.  On the energy front, prices rose by 0.81 percent du e to electricity prices, and annual 
inflation climbed to 4.61 percent. Annual energy in flation is envisaged to fall due to 
developments in oil prices coupled with the base ef fect in February.  
4.  Prices of services increased by 1.34 percent, and a nnual services inflation increased 
to 9.16 percent in January. Prices of services reco rded the fastest monthly increase 
of the last ten years, and high increases spread ac ross sub-groups. The gradually 
slowing price increases in the restaurants-hotels g roup amid the moderate course of 
meat prices in the last quarter of 2015 re-accelera ted in January. In addition to wage 
developments and the high course of food inflation,  accumulated exchange-rate 
pass through effects delay the fall in services inf lation. 
2 
 5.  Annual core goods inflation edged down by 0.12 poin ts to 10.10 percent in January. 
Annual inflation decreased in durable goods, but ma intained its uptrend in other 
sub-groups. Effects of the exchange rate continued with a dwindling pace in prices 
of core goods excluding clothing and durable goods,  while the decline in clothing 
prices remained below seasonal averages. On the oth er hand, seasonally-adjusted 
indicators suggest an improvement in the underlying  trend of core goods inflation in 
January. 
6.  In sum, energy prices continue to affect inflation favorably, while other cost factors 
limit the improvement in the core inflation trend. 
Factors Affecting Inflation   
7.  Industrial production recorded an increase in Decem ber compared to previous 
month. Quarterly production in the fourth quarter m aterialized above the third 
quarter. The headline PMI and the PMI production in dices fell in January, despite 
staying above neutral levels. Business Tendency Sur vey data suggest that domestic 
orders registered an increase from the previous qua rter’s average, while export 
orders were relatively weaker. Given these indicato rs as well as data on exports and 
imports, the pace of industrial production growth i s expected to decelerate 
somewhat in January. 
8.  Data on the expenditure side suggest a milder cours e of private demand growth in 
the final quarter of 2015 relative to the third qua rter. In this period, the production 
and imports of consumer goods were down from the pr evious quarter’s average. 
Among indicators of investment, the production of c apital goods posted a modest 
fourth-quarter growth, whereas the imports receded.  The production of non-
metallic minerals and sales of heavy commercial veh icles, which are indicators for 
construction investments, registered an increase. A mong indicators for the first 
quarter of 2016, auto sales remained subdued in Jan uary, while home appliance 
sales were up. Consumer confidence indices declined  in January and February yet 
remained above the October level. Meanwhile, data o n the investment tendency 
hint at a moderate growth. Against this background,  private demand is expected to 
rise modestly in the first quarter of 2016. 
9.  Favorable developments in the terms of trade accomp anied by the moderate course 
of consumer loans support the recovery in the curre nt account balance. Despite 
heightened geopolitical risks, the growing EU deman d continues to support exports. 
The recovery in Europe, one of Turkey’s major expor t markets, continued into 
January. Additionally, Turkey’s high market-shiftin g flexibility also supports exports. 
Thus, amid a continued EU demand growth, low commod ity prices and ongoing 
macroprudential policies, the current account balan ce is likely to improve further in 
2016, which, however, might be restrained by the li kely fall in tourism revenues due 
to geopolitical developments. 3 
 10.  Unemployment rates were down month-on-month in Nove mber 2015. In this 
period, employment grew at a faster pace than labor  force in nonfarm sectors. 
Across sub-sectors, the services provided the large st contribution to nonfarm 
employment growth. Industrial employment decreased marginally, whereas 
construction employment picked up. Industrial produ ction and survey indicators 
signal no additional rebound for industrial employm ent over the upcoming period. 
The course of nonmetallic mineral production indica tes a moderate growth in 
construction employment. Employment data for sub-se ctors of services remain 
volatile. Leading indicators for the labor market s uggest that unemployment rates 
will remain flat over the coming months. 
11.  In conclusion,  recent indicators suggest that the economy continue s to grow at a 
moderate pace. In the upcoming period, domestic dem and is likely to be supported 
by the income channel through wage increases and lo w oil prices. Although 
geopolitical tensions pose a downside risk, demand from the European Union 
economies continues to support exports at an increa sing pace. 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
12.  Although energy price developments continue to affe ct inflation favorably, other 
cost factors limit the improvement in the core infl ation trend. Meanwhile, food 
prices remain volatile largely due to unprocessed f ood prices. Leading indicators 
point to a likely downward correction in unprocesse d food prices in the short term. 
Moreover, the waning of the lagged pass-through eff ects of cumulative exchange 
rate movements might contribute to disinflation in coming months. Against this 
backdrop, the Committee expects the disinflation to  resume by February. Yet, 
developments in both wages and inflation expectatio ns pose an upside risk to the 
core inflation outlook. Thus, core inflation indica tors are likely to remain elevated 
for some time. The adverse impact of the above-targ et inflation on inflation 
expectations and the acceleration in wage increases  necessitates a close monitoring 
of the overall pricing behavior. Therefore, the cur rent tight monetary stance should 
be maintained in order for the impending disinflati on to be permanent. Against this 
backdrop, considering the impact of wage developmen ts and the uncertainties in 
global markets on inflation expectations and the pr icing behavior, and taking into 
account the volatility in energy and unprocessed fo od prices, the Committee stated 
that the tight liquidity stance will be maintained as long as deemed necessary. 
Future monetary policy decisions will be conditiona l on the inflation outlook. Taking 
into account inflation expectations, the pricing be havior and the course of other 
factors affecting inflation, the tight monetary pol icy stance will be maintained. 
13.  Annual loan growth continues at reasonable levels i n response to the tight monetary 
policy stance and macroprudential measures. Recent data point to no major change 
in the underlying trend of loans. Adjustments in ri sk weights and minimum wages 
are considered to support loan growth through the l oan supply and household 
income channels. Yet, the ongoing financial tighten ing is likely to keep annual loan 4 
 growth rates at reasonable levels. With respect to the composition of loans, 
commercial loans continue to grow faster than consu mer loans. Such a composition 
not only limits medium-term inflationary pressures but also supports the 
improvement in the current account balance. 
14.  Leading data indicate that domestic demand has slow ed somewhat as of mid-2015 
but continues to contribute to growth modestly. The  financial tightening due to 
persisting global volatility dampens domestic deman d growth, whereas energy 
prices and wage developments bolster domestic deman d through the income 
channel. On the foreign demand front, geopolitical developments pose a downside 
risk, yet the European economic recovery and the ma rket-shifting flexibility of 
Turkish exports offset this risk. In fact, the favo rable effect of the growing EU 
demand on exports has become more significant recen tly. Moreover, improvements 
in the terms of trade mainly led by the cumulative fall in commodity prices, coupled 
with the modest course of consumer loans, support t he improvement in the current 
account balance. Overall, economic activity is expe cted to remain on a moderate 
growth path while the current account deficit is ex pected to narrow further in the 
upcoming period. 
15.  The Committee assesses that the effective use of th e policy tools announced in the 
road map of August 2015 strengthen the resilience o f the economy against global 
shocks. This process is supported by a gradual redu ction in demand for foreign 
exchange due to improved current account balance an d lower energy prices. 
Meanwhile, foreign currency liquidity instruments a re used to stabilize the value of 
the Turkish lira. In this context, foreign currency  liquidity is provided through flexible 
foreign exchange sales auctions at amounts deemed n ecessary.  
16.  Nevertheless, uncertainties surrounding global mone tary policies and concerns over 
global growth cause global markets to remain volati le. Emerging-market portfolio 
inflows and risk premiums follow a fluctuating patt ern, while exchange rate 
volatilities remain elevated. In the forthcoming pe riod, both global and domestic 
volatilities will be monitored closely and required  measures in foreign exchange and 
Turkish lira markets will continue to be taken. In the case of sustained volatility, 
additional measures might be taken to support the T urkish lira by adjusting the 
funding conditions for the use of foreign currency denominated collateral, while 
maintaining the tight monetary policy stance. 
17.  In this respect, the Committee stated that the poli cy stance will remain tight against 
the inflation outlook, stabilizing for the FX liqui dity and supportive of the financial 
stability. 
18.  The Committee stated that the wide interest rate co rridor has contributed markedly 
to containing exchange rate volatility in times of heightened global volatility. The 
need for such an instrument would be reduced, shoul d the decline in global volatility 
prove persistent. Another factor that may reduce th e need for a wide interest rate 5 
 corridor is the effective use of the policy instrum ents laid out in the road map 
published in August. Excessive fluctuations in both  exchange rates and loans have 
waned owing to the launch and effective use of thes e instruments. The Committee 
still maintains the view that the monetary policy m ay be implemented within a 
narrower and more standard interest rate corridor, should global volatilities post a 
permanent decline or the policy tools of the August  road map permanently contain 
the effects of the global volatility on the Turkish  economy. 
19.  Developments in the fiscal policy and tax adjustmen ts are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. T he baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal disc ipline will be maintained and 
there will be no unanticipated hikes in administere d prices. A revision of the 
monetary policy stance may be considered, should th e fiscal policy deviate 
significantly from this framework, and consequently  have an adverse effect on the 
medium-term inflation outlook. 
20.  Sustained fiscal discipline has become a fundamenta l element in reducing the 
sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external  shocks in recent years. In the 
current environment of highly uncertain global mark ets, the value added from 
maintaining and further advancing these achievement s is significant. Any measure 
that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings 
deficit will support macroeconomic stability and co ntribute positively to social 
welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term gove rnment securities at low levels. 
 