No: 2016-37

PRESS RELEASE
31 August 2016

SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING
Meeting Date: 23 August 2016

Inflation Developments
1. In July, consumer prices increased by 1.16 percent, and annual inflation went up
by 1.15 points to 8.79 percent. As stated in the Summary of the Monetary Policy
Committee Meeting of July, this rise was driven by prices of unprocessed food and
tobacco products. Both annual inflation figures and the underlying trends of core
indicators followed a flat course in this period.
2. Having surged in the last two months, annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic
beverages climbed to 9.69 percent due to the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables.
However, annual inflation in food items excluding fresh fruits and vegetables
registered a decline. Agricultural prices also displayed a similar path, indicating
that the rise in food inflation in this period stemmed from producer prices. On the
other hand, leading indicators regarding August point out a downward correction
in unprocessed food prices. On the energy front, prices fell by 0.40 percent on
account of the decline in international oil prices. Thus, annual energy inflation
maintained a low course with 2.40 percent.
3. Prices of services increased by 1.07 percent, and the annual services inflation rose
by 0.30 points to 8.55 percent in July. Annual inflation increased in transport and
communication services, but remained almost unchanged in other sub-groups in
this period. Restaurants and hotels group also exhibited a high monthly rise in line
with the high course of food inflation. Meanwhile, the monthly rate of increase in
rents, which had been high for a while, slowed somewhat in July. As a result, the
underlying trend of services recorded an increase in July. The surge in unit labor
costs in the first quarter coupled with increased rigidities due to the prolonged
high course of consumer inflation weigh on services inflation. On the other hand,
the recent deceleration in economic activity may curb services inflation.

4. Annual core goods inflation edged down by 0.31 points to 8.82 percent in July,
driven by durable goods. Prices of durable goods excluding furniture displayed a
favorable outlook. Upon the lingering labor-driven cost pressures since the start of
the year, cumulative price increases in the furniture group amounted to 8 percent
in the first 7 months. The underlying core goods inflation posted a decline in July.
However, the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira is expected to deteriorate the
core goods inflation to some extent in the short term. Nevertheless, waning
cumulative exchange rate effects are likely to pull annual core goods inflation
further down in the upcoming period.
5. In sum, consumer inflation surged in the last two months owing to the
unprocessed food prices. In addition, tobacco products saw price hikes in July as
well. The impact of this rise will be seen also in August, albeit to a relatively limited
extent. The Committee envisages that unprocessed food prices, which saw notable
increases in the last couple of months, may display a downward correction in the
short term. Meanwhile, core inflation is expected to sustain its gradual
downtrend.
Factors Affecting Inflation
6. Data for the second quarter of 2016 indicate a slowing yet ongoing uptrend in
economic activity. Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, the industrial
production index decreased by 1.4 percent in June compared to May. Thus,
following a robust quarterly increase of 1.4 percent in the first quarter, production
declined by 0.6 percent in the second quarter. Despite the favorable figures in
exports excluding gold, negative contribution of net exports to growth continued
amid the rise in import demand coupled with the growing loss in tourism
revenues.
7. Data on the expenditure side point to a modest course in final domestic demand
in the second quarter. The production of consumer goods posted a decline on a
quarterly basis, while that of investment goods remained flat. Retail trade sales
index also exhibited an almost flat pattern, signaling a slowdown compared to the
first quarter. Data regarding the third quarter indicate that the private sector
demand may weaken compared to the first half of the year. In fact, July witnessed
decreases in sales of automobiles, white goods and light commercial vehicles.
Meanwhile, the new job posts and the PMI employment data also confirmed the
signs of deceleration.
8. Although developments in tourism revenues will have a negative impact in the
short run, the lagged effects of the developments in the terms of trade and the
moderate course of consumer loans will continue to contribute to the
improvement in the current account balance. The rising demand from the
European Union countries continues to have a favorable effect on our exports. In
spite of the persisting geopolitical risks, Turkey’s high market-shifting flexibility
continues to support exports. Meanwhile, the favorable impact of commodity

prices on the current account deficit is expected to diminish gradually in coming
months.
9. Seasonally-adjusted unemployment rates posted an increase in May 2016
compared to the previous period. In this period, non-farm employment growth
posted a slowdown, pushing unemployment rates upwards. The prolonged
uptrend in construction employment was interrupted to a limited extent, while
industrial employment remained flat after a recovery in the March-April period,
and the services employment picked up slightly compared to the past. The data
from the Social Security Institution indicate that the stagnant tourism sector
started to have spillovers on employment. Leading indicators signal a deceleration
in employment growth in the short term.
10. To sum up, economic activity continues to grow at a moderate and stable pace.
Domestic developments of July may cause a pause in this trend in the short term.
However, this is not likely to be a permanent trend, as the recent measures
contained the adverse impacts on the markets. On the other hand, the reduction
in tourism revenues is expected to curtail the improvement in the current account
balance, rise in employment and growth.
Monetary Policy and Risks
11. Financial conditions remain tight, while the moderate course of annual loan
growth rates continue. Despite the recent rise in global risk appetite and capital
inflows, the improvement in financial conditions is detained due to domestic
developments. The gradual fall in the marginal funding rate spilled over into loan
and deposit rates remarkably, yet loan-deposit spreads remain high, and loan
standards exercised by banks have not eased. Moreover, the moderate course of
final domestic demand also restricts loan growth. Given the demand and supplyside factors no noticeable rebound is envisaged in loan growth rates in the short
term.
12. Economic activity maintains a moderate and stable course of growth.
Consumption spending has slowed down slightly, while investment remains
relatively sluggish. Meanwhile, the steady increase in employment and wage
developments support domestic demand through the income channel. Despite the
adverse effects of geopolitical developments on external demand, exports of
goods to the European Union countries remain strong. Restored relations with
Russia may also support external demand gradually. Accordingly, exports of goods
are expected to provide further contributions to growth in the upcoming period.
In this respect, economic activity is expected to show a moderate pace of growth
across the year. Domestic developments in July, geopolitical factors, waning global
growth and sluggish tourism sector pose a downside risk to economic activity. On
the other hand, domestic confidence indices have not shown a sharp
deterioration. This, together with the market-shifting flexibility of our exports put
a limit on the downside risks.

13. The volatility in global financial markets has recently eased, and portfolio inflows
to emerging markets gained momentum amid the increased risk appetite. The
consequences of the mid-July turmoil in Turkey on financial markets were largely
taken back thanks to the rise in the global risk appetite and the liquidity measures.
The tight monetary policy stance, the cautious macroprudential policy and the
effective use of the policy tools announced in the road map of August 2015
enhance the resilience of the economy against external shocks. Accordingly, the
Committee decided to take one more measured step towards simplification by
lowering the marginal funding rate.
14. The ultimate aim of simplification is to achieve a narrow and symmetrical corridor
and provide funding via a single rate. Simplification is believed to contribute to the
effectiveness of the transmission mechanism. Therefore, simplification of the
monetary policy is planned to be finalized within a reasonable schedule. The pace
and timing of simplification will depend on the developments regarding inflation
and financial stability.
15. Pioneered by unprocessed food and tobacco products, inflation registered a
notable increase in July, while core inflation indicators followed a flat course.
Lagged effects of cumulative exchange rate movements eased further,
underpinning the improvement in core goods inflation. However, pressures led by
unit labor costs and food prices caused the underlying trend of the services
inflation to remain high. In spite of the support from the low level of imported
input costs, the improvement in the inflation trend has been limited. Growing
signals for deceleration in domestic demand stemming from the latest domestic
developments and the poor outlook in the tourism sector constitute downside
risks to demand and inflation. Nevertheless, exchange rate movements and
possible public price/tax adjustments keep the upside risks to inflation brisk. In
this respect, developments regarding the inflation outlook necessitate the
maintenance of the tight liquidity policy stance.
16. In the upcoming period, the monetary policy stance will be conditional on the
inflation outlook. Taking into account inflation expectations, the pricing behavior
and the course of other factors affecting inflation, the tight monetary policy stance
will be maintained.
17. Developments in the fiscal policy and tax adjustments are monitored closely with
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline monetary policy
stance is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained
and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices. A revision of the
monetary policy stance may be considered should the fiscal policy deviate
significantly from this framework, and consequently have an adverse effect on the
medium-term inflation outlook.
18. Sustained fiscal discipline has become essential in reducing the sensitivity of the
Turkish economy against external shocks in recent years. In the current

environment of highly uncertain global markets, the gains from maintaining and
further advancing these achievements are significant. Any measure to provide
permanent fiscal discipline and reduction in the savings deficit will support
macroeconomic stability and contribute positively to social welfare by keeping
interest rates of long-term government securities at low levels.

