   
 
No: 2016-25  
PRESS RELEASE  
28 June 2016 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING 
Meeting Date: 21 June 2016       
Inflation Developments  
1.  In May, consumer prices rose by 0.58 percent, and a nnual inflation remained flat 
with 6.58 percent. Food inflation increased somewha t due to the base effect, yet 
maintained its low course and continued to limit co nsumer inflation. In this period, 
annual inflation in core indicators registered a de cline, while improvement in the 
underlying trend proved more evident. 
2.  Annual inflation in the food and non-alcoholic beve rages group rose by 1.09 points to 
2.47 percent in May. The low course of food inflati on was mainly driven by 
unprocessed food prices, the annual inflation of wh ich was -4.22 percent. In this 
group, prices of fresh fruits and vegetables remain ed below the previous year’s levels 
due to increased supply of products, whereas red me at prices exhibited a mild 
outlook amid the measures in effect. On the other h and, processed food inflation 
sustained its high course due to prices of items ot her than meat and dairy products. 
Although leading indicators on June indicate that u nprocessed food prices may be 
subject to a partial correction and the group’s ann ual inflation may soar, food prices 
are expected to support the low course in inflation  across the year. On the energy 
front, prices rose by 1.10 percent in line with the  international oil prices and 
depreciating Turkish lira, while annual inflation s ustained the favorable outlook with 
1.65 percent. 
3.  Prices of services increased by 0.76 percent, and t he annual services inflation stood 
close to the previous month’s level with 8.74 perce nt in May. Being the culprit of high 
figures in services inflation, the deceleration in restaurants-hotels and other services 
groups in the last couple of months continued in Ma y excluding package tour prices. 
The mild course in food prices reflected favorably on prices in the restaurants-hotels 
group, and the attenuated cumulative effects of the  exchange rate underpins the 
slowdown in inflation in other services. On the oth er hand, it is assessed that the 
surge in unit labor costs in the first quarter is a lso responsible for the high course in 
services inflation. Moreover, it is notable that re nts soared in May as they did in 
April. All in all, the underlying trend of services  prices remained high in May. 
 4.  Annual core goods inflation decreased by 1.29 point s to 8.82 percent in May. Annual 
inflation recorded a decline in all sub-groups, and  the clothing and durable goods 
groups stood out. Prices of durable goods registere d a favorable outlook on account 
of the fall in white goods and flat course of autom obile prices in addition to declining 
furniture prices following an uptrend in the first four months of the year. The 
underlying trend of core goods improved further, an d when clothing is excluded, the 
improvement is still remarkable. Amid the decelerat ing cumulative exchange rate 
effects, annual core goods inflation is projected t o slow in the second half of the year. 
5.  In sum, inflation has recently recorded a notable d ecline driven mainly by the 
unprocessed food prices. Core inflation indicators also recorded favorable figures, yet 
remained high in May. Meanwhile, the improvement in  the underlying core inflation 
trend proved more remarkable in this period. Accord ingly, annual inflation in core 
indicators is projected to fall further in the upco ming period. However, the high 
inflation trend in the services group coupled with the unit labor cost developments 
limit disinflation. 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
6.  According to TurkStat data for the first quarter of  2016, GDP grew by 4.8 percent 
year-on-year. On the production side, industries an d services made the greatest 
contribution to the first quarter’s annual growth. Adjusted for seasonal and calendar 
effects, GDP increased by 0.8 percent from the prev ious quarter. On the spending 
side, consumption and exports were the main drivers  of quarterly growth. In this 
period, private consumption accelerated amid wage h ikes, employment growth and 
improving financial conditions. Exports were buoyed  by the strengthening EU 
recovery. Nonetheless, with imports gaining remarka bly in the first quarter due to 
increased consumption, net exports contributed nega tively to quarterly growth. In 
short, growth was driven largely by consumption and  supported somewhat by 
exports in the first quarter, yet capital accumulat ion remained moderate.  
7.  Data for the second quarter of 2016 indicate no add itional acceleration for economic 
activity. Industrial production dropped by 1.1 perc ent month-on-month in April on 
the back of mining, vehicle, furniture and computer  industries. May’s PMI indicators 
and BTS indicators for orders over the last three m onths performed slightly better 
than in April, suggesting some correction in indust rial production for May. Given 
favorable calendar effects and May’s strike-driven low base effect from automotive 
manufacturing in last year, industrial production i s expected to post a stronger year-
on-year increase in May than in April.  
8.  Data on the spending front point to a slowing consu mer demand and mildly 
recovering investments for the second quarter. The production and imports of 
consumer goods declined in April. Sales of home app liances fell marginally during 
April-May, whereas sales of automobiles remained on  the rise. Among indicators for 
investments, imports of non-vehicle capital goods a nd machinery-equipment were up 
from the previous quarter’s average, while their pr oduction dropped. Sales of light  and heavy commercial vehicles increased in the Apri l-May period. The waning 
uncertainty and improved financial conditions are b elieved to help investments 
recover.  
9.  Favorable developments in the terms of trade accomp anied by the moderate course 
of consumer loans support the recovery in the curre nt account balance. The growing 
EU demand continues to support exports. High market -shifting flexibility of exports 
limits downside risks caused by geopolitical develo pments. Yet, the falling number of 
foreign visitors weighs on revenues from services, posing a downside risk to the 
current account balance. 
10.  Seasonally-adjusted unemployment rates were down in  March for the second 
consecutive month. The strengthening non-farm emplo yment growth pulled 
unemployment rates down despite the increased labor  force participation. Industrial 
employment saw a moderate gain, while construction and services employment 
expanded significantly. Failing to spread across al l sectors, the employment growth in 
services was driven mostly by public administration  and community services. In view 
of production and survey indicators, employment is expected to remain on a modest 
track in the short term. Yet, the SSI data indicate  that the stagnant tourism industry 
has started to affect employment. Thus, the unemplo yment rate continues to face 
upside risks for the period ahead. 
11.  In sum, current indicators suggest that the economy  continues to grow at a moderate 
and steady pace. Income channel supports domestic d emand through wage 
increases. Although geopolitical developments conti nue to pose downside risks, the 
growing EU demand continues to support exports, and  thus production. 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
12.  Annual loan growth continues at reasonable levels i n response to the tight monetary 
policy stance and macroprudential measures. Risk we ight arrangements and wage 
developments are expected to boost loan growth furt her in the upcoming period via 
loan supply and household income channels. Thus, an nual loan growth rates are 
likely to remain at reasonable levels. With respect  to the composition of loans, 
commercial loans continue to grow faster than consu mer loans. This composition not 
only limits medium-term inflationary pressures but also supports the improvement in 
the current account balance. 
13.  Economic activity remains on a moderate and steady growth track. In the first 
quarter, GDP expanded on the back of domestic deman d. Consumer spending 
spurred domestic demand while investments remained weak. Despite the negative 
implications of geopolitical developments in extern al demand, exports to the EU 
remained on the rise. Accordingly, exports made a p ositive contribution to growth in 
the first quarter. Domestic demand is expected to c ontinue to support growth in the 
upcoming period. Employment remains on a moderate u pward path. Given wage 
developments, employment growth is likely to suppor t domestic demand further  through the income channel. On the external demand side, geopolitical tensions and 
the weakening global growth continued to pose risks , while risks to the tourism 
industry became prevalent. However, the robust incr ease in Turkey’s exports to the 
EU and the market-shifting flexibility of exports a lleviate the downside risks to 
external balance. Moreover, the favorable impact of  the cumulative fall in 
commodity prices on the terms of trade and the mode rate course of consumer loans 
contribute to the improvement in the current accoun t balance. 
14.  Global financial markets remain volatile amid ongoi ng concerns over global growth, 
developments regarding UK's exit from the EU and co ntinued uncertainty about 
global monetary policies. Accordingly, emerging-mar ket portfolio flows slowed while 
risk premiums and exchange rate volatilities record ed increases. The Committee 
assesses that the tight monetary policy stance, the  cautious macroprudential policies 
and the effective use of the policy instruments lai d out in the road map published in 
August 2015 enhance the resilience of the economy a gainst shocks. In fact, the 
Turkish lira has followed a relatively less volatil e path than other emerging market 
currencies since September 2015. Against this backd rop, the Committee decided to 
take a measured step towards simplification by lowe ring the marginal funding rate. 
Moreover, within the context of the road map, relat ed departments made 
presentations about the arrangements that would inc rease the predictability of 
liquidity policy and make liquidity management of b anks more efficient. 
15.  The sharp decline in food inflation since the begin ning of the year helped to bring 
consumer inflation markedly down. The recent improv ement in the core inflation 
indicators also contributed to this disinflation. L ow imported-input costs and the 
continued weakening of the lagged effects of cumula tive exchange rate movements 
support the improvement in the underlying core infl ation trend. On the other hand, 
the underlying services inflation trend remains ele vated. High levels of inflation 
expectations and unit labor cost developments restr ain the improvement in the 
underlying trend of inflation. To this end, the Com mittee stated that the current tight 
liquidity stance should be maintained in order to e nsure that the recently observed 
disinflation becomes permanent.  
16.  In the upcoming period, the monetary policy stance will be conditional on the 
inflation outlook. Taking into account inflation ex pectations, the pricing behavior and 
the course of other factors affecting inflation, th e tight monetary policy stance will be 
maintained. Moreover, global and domestic volatilit ies will be monitored closely and 
necessary measures will be taken for the foreign ex change and Turkish lira markets. 
In sum, the policy stance will remain tight against  the inflation outlook, stabilizing for 
the FX liquidity and supportive of financial stabil ity. 
17.  Developments in the fiscal policy and tax adjustmen ts are monitored closely with 
regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. T he baseline monetary policy stance 
is formulated under the assumption that fiscal disc ipline will be maintained and there 
will be no unanticipated hikes in administered pric es. A revision of the monetary  policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from 
this framework, and consequently have an adverse ef fect on the medium-term 
inflation outlook. 
18.  Sustained fiscal discipline has become a fundamenta l element in reducing the 
sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external  shocks in recent years. In the 
current environment of highly uncertain global mark ets, the value added from 
maintaining and further advancing these achievement s is significant. Any measure 
that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings 
deficit will support macroeconomic stability and co ntribute positively to social 
welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term gove rnment securities at low levels. 
 