   
 
No: 2016-36  
PRESS RELEASE  
August 23, 2016 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE 
 
Participating Committee Members 
Murat Çetinkaya (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Erka n Kilimci, Murat Uysal, Abdullah Yavaş. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to set the short term interest rates as foll ows: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate has  been reduced from 8.75 percent to 8.5 percent, 
and borrowing rate has been kept at 7.25 percent, 
b)  One-week repo rate has been kept at 7.5 percent, 
c)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing rate has been kept 
at 0 percent, and lending rate has been reduced fro m 10.25 percent to 10 percent. 
Annual loan growth continues at reasonable rates in  response to the tight monetary policy stance and 
macroprudential measures. Although developments in tourism revenues will have a negative impact in the  
short run, the lagged effects of the developments i n the terms of trade and the moderate course of con sumer 
loans will continue to contribute to the improvemen t in the current account balance. While domestic de mand 
is having a positive impact on growth, albeit at a lesser extent, demand from the European Union econo mies 
continues to support exports. Accordingly, economic  activity displays a moderate and stable course of growth. 
The Committee assesses that the implementation of t he structural reforms would contribute to the poten tial 
growth significantly. 
The adverse impact of domestic developments in mid- July on market indicators has been largely reversed  due 
to improved global risk appetite and the recent mea sures. Moreover, the tight monetary policy stance, the 
cautious macroprudential policies and the effective  use of the policy instruments laid out in the road  map 
published in August 2015 have increased the resilie nce of the economy against shocks. Also considering  its 
contribution to the effectiveness of monetary polic y, the Committee decided to take a measured and cau tious 
step towards simplification. 
Unprocessed food prices, which have recently shown marked increases, are projected to display a downwar d 
correction in the short term. Meanwhile, the core i nflation trend is expected to improve gradually. Ye t, the 
developments in the inflation outlook necessitate t he maintenance of a tight liquidity stance.  
Future monetary policy decisions will be conditiona l on the inflation outlook. Taking into account inf lation 
expectations, pricing behavior and the course of ot her factors affecting inflation, the tight monetary  policy 
stance will be maintained.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five working days. 
 
