   
 
No: 2016-28  
PRESS RELEASE  
July 19, 2016 
 
DECISION OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE 
Participating Committee Members 
Murat Çetinkaya (Governor), Ahmet Faruk Aysan, Erka n Kilimci, Murat Uysal, Abdullah Yavaş. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has d ecided to set the short term interest rates as foll ows: 
a)  Overnight Interest Rates: Marginal Funding Rate has  been reduced from 9 percent to 8,75 percent, 
and borrowing rate has been kept at 7.25 percent, 
b)  One-week repo rate has been kept at 7.5 percent, 
c)  Late Liquidity Window Interest Rates (between 4:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.): Borrowing rate has been kept 
at 0 percent, and lending rate has been reduced fro m 10.5 percent to 10.25 percent. 
Annual loan growth continues at reasonable rates in  response to the tight monetary policy stance and 
macroprudential measures. The favorable development s in the terms of trade and the moderate course of 
consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the  current account balance. While domestic demand 
continues to have a positive impact on growth, dema nd from the European Union economies continues to 
support exports. Accordingly economic activity disp lays a moderate and stable course of growth. The 
Committee assesses that the implementation of the s tructural reforms would contribute to the potential  
growth significantly. 
Recently, domestic developments have led to fluctua tions in financial markets. The Committee assesses that 
the recent liquidity measures have alleviated the v olatility in financial markets. Moreover, the tight  monetary 
policy stance, the cautious macroprudential policie s and the effective use of the policy instruments l aid out in 
the road map published in August 2015 have increase d the resilience of the economy against shocks. Als o 
considering its contribution to the effectiveness o f monetary policy, the Committee decided to take a 
measured and cautious step towards simplification. 
The Committee has indicated that inflation may disp lay a marked increase in the short term due to 
developments in unprocessed food and tobacco prices . Meanwhile, the core inflation trend is expected t o 
improve gradually. Yet, the developments in inflati on outlook necessitate the maintenance of a tight l iquidity 
stance.  
Future monetary policy decisions will be conditiona l on the inflation outlook. Taking into account inf lation 
expectations, pricing behavior and the course of ot her factors affecting inflation, the tight monetary  policy 
stance will be maintained. Moreover, market develop ments will be closely monitored and the necessary 
liquidity measures will continue to be taken to sup port financial stability. 
It should be emphasized that any new data or inform ation may lead the Committee to revise its stance. 
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meetin g will be released within five working days. 
 
