1 
   
 
No: 2017-21  
PRESS RELEASE  
28 April 2017 
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date: 26 April 2017 
Inflation Developments   
1.  In March, consumer prices were up 1.02 percent and annual inflation increased by 
1.16 points to 11.29 percent. As stated in the summ ary of the MPC meeting in 
March, annual food inflation was the key driver of the rising consumer inflation in 
this period due, among others, to the low base effe ct from a year earlier. On the 
other hand, energy prices inched down amid lower in ternational oil prices. Services 
inflation remained high while core goods saw widesp read price hikes due to the 
lagged effect of the cumulative Turkish lira deprec iation. Thus, core inflation 
indicators remained on the rise. 
2.  Prices of food and nonalcoholic beverages increased  by 1.93 percent in March, 
bringing annual inflation up by 3.81 points to 12.5 3 percent in this subcategory. This 
upsurge was mostly attributed to higher unprocessed  food prices, particularly for 
fresh fruits, and the low base effect. On the proce ssed food front, prices continued 
to rise rapidly month-on-month due to exchange rate s, causing annual processed 
food inflation to hit 7.28 percent. Leading indicat ors for April signal that annual food 
inflation will increase sharply on the back of the base effect from unprocessed food. 
Energy prices edged down by 0.95 percent amid lower  international oil prices in 
March. Accordingly, after having surged since June 2016, annual energy inflation 
declined to 12.19 percent in this period. 
3.  Prices of services rose by 0.63 percent while annua l services inflation inched up by 
0.27 points to 8.64 percent in March. Annual inflat ion was up in transport and other 
services but remained flat in other subcategories. Prices of transport services were 
driven higher by the lagged effects of rising fuel prices. Across other services, both 
exchange rates and the high level of headline infla tion pushed inflation higher in 
subcategories such as maintenance and repair, healt hcare and education. Rent 
inflation remained elevated. 
4.  Annual core goods inflation increased by 1.63 point s to 10.46 percent in March. The 
lagged spillovers of the depreciating Turkish lira continued to weigh on all 
2 
 subcategories. Clothing and footwear prices soared much faster than historical 
averages in March. Prices of durable goods were up mainly because of the exchange 
rate-stricken auto industry. In this period, prices  of core goods excluding clothing 
and durables increased dramatically due to the exch ange rate pass-through. 
5.  In summary, cost-push pressures and the volatility in food prices in recent months 
have led to a sharp increase in inflation. Although  the recent improvement in the 
risk appetite contains some of the upside pressures  from cost factors, current 
elevated levels of inflation pose risks on the pric ing behavior. 
Factors Affecting Inflation  
6.  Data for the fourth quarter of 2016 confirmed the c onjecture that the third-quarter 
economic slowdown was transitory. In this period, t he Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) expanded by 3.8 percent quarter-on-quarter an d 3.5 percent year-on-year. 
Excluding the offset work day losses of the third q uarter, the fourth quarter was 
marked by a moderate growth. The TURKSTAT’s upward revisions to the first three 
quarters of 2016 showed that the level of economic activity was much higher than 
anticipated. Hence, the economy grew by 2.9 percent  in 2016, a rate much lower 
than past years’ averages. 
7.  Annual growth was driven by domestic demand in the last quarter of 2016. Private 
spending was up both annually and quarterly thanks to the demand brought 
forward by automobile tax adjustments, eased macrop rudential measures and 
better financial conditions. Investments, particula rly machinery and equipment 
investments, were relatively weak in this period. W ith exports accelerating in the 
last quarter, net external demand provided consider ably higher contribution to 
quarterly growth and a slightly better contribution  to annual growth compared to 
the first nine months of 2016. 
8.  The first-quarter data for 2017 hint at diminishing  recovery in economic activity in 
the first quarter. Following a robust increase in J anuary, industrial production 
contracted in February. Rapid depreciation of the T urkish lira at the start of the 
quarter, uncertainties led by volatile financial ma rkets and the leap in inflation are 
projected to dampen consumption and investment spen ding. Although tax 
incentives stimulate the demand for houses, furnitu re and home appliances, the 
recovery in domestic demand fails to spread across all sectors. Indicators for March 
and April signal for a stronger economic activity a nd labor market. In brief, the mild 
recovery in the underlying trend of economic activi ty continues, which is enhanced 
by supportive incentives and measures. 
9.  Despite a partial recovery in domestic demand, net external demand spurs growth 
with robust increases in exports of goods that spil l over into all sectors. The growing 
demand from the European Union economies, normalizi ng relations with 
neighboring countries, the course of the real excha nge rate, and Turkey’s market-
shifting flexibility abroad continues to stimulate exports. Increases in exports of 
goods translate into a decelerated deterioration in  the current account deficit and 3 
 improvement in core current account deficit indicat ors. In addition to the expected 
partial recovery in tourism, the robust course of e xports of goods is expected to 
contribute positively to the current account. 
10.  The worsening trend in the labor market that began in May 2016 came to a halt in 
January 2017. In this period, non-farm employment r ecorded an uptick particularly 
with the contribution from the services sector. Mea nwhile, leading indicators, such 
as new job vacancies, the PMI employment index and the expectations for the 
number of employees in services and construction fo r March and April suggest a 
recovery in the employment outlook. Amid the mild r ebound in economic activity 
and the announced employment incentive packages, th e partial improvement in 
unemployment rates is expected to continue. 
11.  In sum, the recently released data indicate a gradu al recovery in the economic 
activity. Domestic demand conditions display a mode rate improvement and demand 
from the European Union economies continues to cont ribute positively to exports. 
With the supportive measures and incentives provide d recently, the economic 
activity is expected to gain further pace in the fo rthcoming period. However, the 
course of capital flows in line with uncertainties regarding global economic policies, 
geopolitical developments, the subsided course of t he labor market and the 
lingering volatility in exchange rates may stand ou t as factors to limit the pace of 
growth in 2017. 
Monetary Policy and Risks 
12.  Financial market impact of expectations about post- election US economic policies 
has started to wane since early 2017. Compared to t he previous reporting period, 
indicators of economic activity point at a stronger  global growth in 2017, owing 
especially to advanced economies. However, uncertai nties over the Brexit process 
and blurred prospects for post-electoral economic p olicies in the US keep downside 
risks to global growth brisk. As of the first quart er of 2017, the upward trend in 
advanced economies’ long-term bond yields which sta rted in November came to a 
halt, and portfolio flows to bond and stock markets  of emerging economies resumed 
thanks to abated uncertainties over the Fed policy accompanied by optimistic 
expectations in financial markets. Although there i s a slight recovery in recent global 
financial conditions, the pace of the Fed’s monetar y tightening cycle will be the 
determining factor on the direction and volume of p ortfolio flows to emerging 
economies. 
13.  Despite the relative improvement in global financia l conditions, domestic financial 
conditions tightened slightly in the first quarter of 2017 due to the partly persistent 
volatility in the exchange rate market and the tigh tening in monetary policy. On the 
other hand, the Turkish lira has recently diverged positively from other emerging 
economy currencies and offset past losses to some e xtent. Moreover, 
macroprudential policies supporting the financial s ystem, public incentives and 
public credit guarantees allowed credit conditions to continue to recover. The 4 
 recovery in consumer loans and Turkish lira denomin ated commercial loans 
observed in the first quarter of 2017 is monitored closely with regard to its effects 
on aggregate demand and economic activity. 
14.  Downside risks to economic activity have recently a bated. The growth outlook for 
2017 is expected to be more favorable compared to 2 016 which was subject to 
numerous concurrent adverse shocks. The relative st ability in tourism revenues, the 
strengthened confidence channel, the favorable effe ct of the cumulative exchange 
rate depreciation on net exports, and the normaliza tion of commercial relations 
with Russia will all contribute to growth. Moreover , measures and incentives to 
stimulate consumption and investment expenditures, fading perceptions of 
uncertainty and the improvement in the tightness of  financial conditions will also 
enhance growth. Accordingly, economic activity is e xpected to strengthen as of the 
second quarter of the year. On the other hand, the pace of recovery in tourism 
revenues, uncertainties regarding monetary policies  of advanced economies, the 
course of capital flows and geopolitical developmen ts constitute downside risks to 
growth in 2017 as well as it has recently. 
15.  Consumer inflation has surged since November 2016 a nd rose above the upper band 
of January forecasts. The upward trend in inflation  was largely driven by the 
depreciation in the Turkish lira and the rise in im port prices in addition to the 
increase in food prices. The rapid depreciation in the Turkish lira spread across the 
consumer price index, particularly to energy and du rable goods items. 
16.  The Committee evaluated medium-term projections to be presented in the April 
Inflation Report in the meeting. Year-end inflation  forecasts for 2017 and 2018 were 
revised upwards by 0.5 and 0.4 points, respectively , compared to the 2017 January 
Inflation Report. Given a tight policy stance that focuses on bringing inflation down, 
inflation is estimated to converge gradually to the  5-percent target. Accordingly, 
inflation is likely to be 8.5 percent at end-2017, and stabilize around 5 percent in the 
medium term after falling to 6.4 percent in 2018. A s also indicated in the previous 
Report, due to the base effects stemming from the p rices of unprocessed food, 
tobacco and clothing as well as temporary tax reduc tions, consumer inflation will 
fluctuate throughout 2017. Inflation is expected to  reach the highest levels in April-
May particularly due to the base effect from unproc essed food and the lagged 
effects of the exchange rate, and then to fall ther eafter as the impact of last year’s 
price increases in energy, alcohol-tobacco products  and food gradually diminishes. 
The tight monetary stance will support the disinfla tion process. 
17.  Aggregate demand conditions on which medium-term in flation forecasts are based, 
continue to have a disinflationary effect albeit at  a more limited extent in 
comparison with the January Report. The upward revi sion in last year’s national 
income data and the acceleration in credit indicate  that the recovery in economic 
activity might be stronger than expected. However h igh levels of unemployment 
rates suggest that the demand-side risks on inflati on are balanced. The effects on 5 
 aggregate demand conditions, of production and empl oyment incentives and 
measures to boost the credit market, will be closel y monitored in the upcoming 
period. 
18.  Risks to food inflation – another major determinant  of inflation forecasts – are 
considered to be on the upside. Due to the recovery  in the exports of food products 
and the impact of the exchange rate developments, f ood inflation might exceed 
current projections, which are based on the assumpt ion that measures taken by the 
Food Committee will considerably balance the upside  risks to food prices. 
19.  Although the recent improvement in the risk appetit e contains some of the upside 
pressures from cost factors, current elevated level s of inflation pose risks on the 
pricing behavior. Accordingly, the Committee decide d to strengthen the monetary 
tightening in order to contain the deterioration in  the inflation outlook, and raised 
the Late Liquidity Window lending rate from 11.75 p ercent to 12.25 percent in its 
April meeting. Tight stance in monetary policy will  be maintained until inflation 
outlook displays a significant improvement. The CBR T formulates monetary policy in 
consideration of the medium-term inflation outlook,  thus, focuses on the 
developments in the underlying trend of inflation r ather than the anticipated 
fluctuations in inflation driven by the base effect s during the course of the year. 
Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors affecting inflation will be 
closely monitored and, if needed, further monetary tightening will be delivered. 
20.  Developments in fiscal policy and tax adjustments a re monitored closely with regard 
to their effects on the inflation outlook. The base line monetary policy stance for the 
upcoming period is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be 
maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes  in administered prices. A 
revision of the monetary policy stance may be consi dered, should the fiscal policy 
deviate significantly from this framework and have an adverse effect on the 
medium-term inflation outlook. 
21.  In recent years, sustained fiscal discipline has be en one of key factors in lowering 
the sensitivity of the Turkish economy against exte rnal shocks. Countercyclical fiscal 
policy has been implemented recently, thanks to the  space provided by fiscal 
discipline. Structural measures, which would improv e the potential to implement 
countercyclical fiscal policy, will contribute to t he coordination of monetary and 
fiscal policy, and thus support macroeconomic stabi lity. 
 
 