 
 
 
HEAD OFFICE    ANKARA, 31 January 2017  
Please refer to  
 TÜRKİYE CUMHURİYET MERKEZ BANKASI  A.Ş.  Anafa rtalar Mh. İstiklal Cad. 10 06050  Ulus-Altındağ - ANKA RA 
 TİCARET SİCİL NUMARASI: 269  Tel: ( 90-312) 507 50 00 Fax : (90 312) 507 56 40  
 SERMAYESİ: 25.000 TL  E-Mail: iletisimbilgi@tcmb.gov.tr  Swift: tcmbtr2a  
 İDARE MERKEZİ, ANKARA  Web:  http://www.tcmb.gov.tr  
                (CENTRAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY)  B.02.2.TCM.0.00.00.00 - 
 
 
Mehmet ŞİMŞEK  
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER  
ANKARA  
 
As stipulated in the Article 42 of the Central Bank Law, in the case of a significant 
breach of the inflation target, the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (the Central Bank) is 
accountable for reporting to the Government and announcing to the public the reasons behind 
the breach of the target and the necessary measures to be taken. As stated in the main policy 
document titled “Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy in 2016”, which was published on 
December 9, 201 5; the inflation target for 201 6 was set joi ntly with the Government as 5 
percent. In the same document, it was also indicated that the Central Bank would write an open 
letter to the Government should end -year inflation exceed the target significantly (by more than 
2 percentage points in either dire ction). Inflation reached 8. 53 percent at end -2016, notably 
exceeding the target. This text elaborates on the reasons why the target was missed and explains 
the measures already taken —and to be taken —to bring inflation back to the targe t. 
Factors Affectin g Inflation in 2016  
In the first Inflation Report of 2016 (IR 2016/I), the mid -point of the year -end inflation 
forecast was given as 7.5 percent. However, deviations from the underlying assumptions and 
developments affecting the dynamics of inflation through 2016 caused inflation to end the year 
at a higher rate .   
The main factors causing inflation to breach the target in 2016 include  tax adjustments , 
wage increases  and the Turkish lira depreciation.  The large minimum wage raise in early 2016 
pushed t he overall wage level higher , which affected co nsumer prices through both cost  and 
income  channel s, while SCT adjustments for tobacco, alcoholic beverages, fuel and 
automobiles had a negative impact on inflation over the year . The fourth quarter’s plunging   
Turkish lira and highly volatile exchange rates affected inflation not only through first -round 
cost pressures but also through expectations channel and the overall pricing behavior .  TÜRKİYE CUMHURİYET MERKEZ BANKASI A.Ş  
TİCARET SİCİL NUMARASI: 269  
SERMAYESİ: 25.000 TL  
İDARE MERKEZ İ, ANKARA  
(CENTRAL  BANK  OF THE  REPUBLIC  OF TURKEY)  Anafa rtalar Mh. İstiklal Cad. 10 06050  Ulus-Altındağ - ANKA RA 
Tel: ( 90-312) 507 50 00 Fax : (90 312) 507 56 40  
E-Mail: iletisimbilgi@tcmb.gov.tr Swift: tcmbtr2a  
Web: http://www.tcmb.gov.tr  
 Emerging market currencies have depreciated dramatically since mid -2013  amid 
heightened uncertainty over global monetary policies. Both this ongoing outlook and 
geopolitical developments of 2016 caused the Turkish lira to depreciate by about 11 percent 
against the foreign currency basket in 201 6. A large part of this depreciation occurred in the 
final quarter,  rendering the cumulative exchange rate  pass-through less effective through the 
year.  In fact, the annual core goods inflation remained on a  marked downtrend until November, 
but started to climb by December due to  the fourth -quarter TL plunge .  
After dipping to an all -time low since 2004 in early 2016 , oil prices  had an increasing 
trend throughout 2016  and are up by more than 40 percent year -on-year in December . 
Additionally, the TL depreciation and the SCT hike on  fuel led to a dramatic year -on-year 
increase in annual energy inflation . Despite higher  electricity prices  of early 2016 , the total 
contribution from reduc ed natural gas prices and administered prices of energy was small .  
Alcoholic beverages and tobacco made the fastest -growing contribution to inflation 
through 2016 . Besides SCT adjustments in January and December, July price hikes by tobacco  
companies  also stood out in this category . Thus, alcoholic beverages and tobacco pushed 
annual inflation up by 1. 6 points .  
 Services inflation remained elevated over the year as well . Despite the downward 
pressure from t he subdued econom y, the tourism slump and the moderate food inflation, 
services inflation remained high amid soaring  real unit wages , the tumbling Turkish lira  and 
rising inflation expectations .  
Meanwhile,  food prices weighed on consumer inflation in 2016, contrary to previous 
years . Along with favorable  supply conditions of agricultural products, the measures put into 
effect by the Food  and Agricul tural Products Markets Monitoring and Evaluation  Committee, 
the dismal tourism industry and the glut caused by Russian sanctions helped annual food 
inflation to remain far below the historical averages .   
In sum , despite weaker domestic demand conditions and moderate food prices, inflation  
exceeded the target due to developments in exchange rates and import prices as well as 
adjustments in minimum wages and taxes . The lagged effects of the  Turkish lira depreciation in 
the last few months , the course of oil  prices and heightened medium -term inflation expectations 
place an upward pressure on the inflation outlook . On the other hand , the modest economic 
activity and the predict ion that there will be no more upward adjustments on wage, tax and 
administered pric es are estimated to bring inflation down  in 2017 .  
 
 TÜRKİYE CUMHURİYET MERKEZ BANKASI A.Ş  
TİCARET SİCİL NUMARASI: 269  
SERMAYESİ: 25.000 TL  
İDARE MERKEZ İ, ANKARA  
(CENTRAL  BANK  OF THE  REPUBLIC  OF TURKEY)  Anafa rtalar Mh. İstiklal Cad. 10 06050  Ulus-Altındağ - ANKA RA 
Tel: ( 90-312) 507 50 00 Fax : (90 312) 507 56 40  
E-Mail: iletisimbilgi@tcmb.gov.tr Swift: tcmbtr2a  
Web: http://www.tcmb.gov.tr  
 Measures Taken to Reach the Inflation Target   
Throughout the year, the Central Bank has shaped its monetary policy framework by 
taking into account inflation developments and expectations. Up until September, reduced 
inflationary pressures, tight financial conditions and mild global conditions enabled the Bank to 
gradually reduce the marginal funding rate. Accordingly, the marginal funding rate was 
lowered by a total of 250 basis points duri ng the March -September 2016 period. From October 
onwards, however, the Bank has adopted a more cautious approach due to cost pressures 
stemming from rising oil prices and exchange rate. In this regard, after keeping the policy rates 
constant in October, th e Bank  raised both the weekly repo rate and the marginal funding rate in 
November, i n order to contain the adverse impact of exchange rate movements , caused by  
heightened global uncertainty and volatility , on the inflation outlook .  In addition, the Bank also 
tightened the liquidity policy by  increasing the share of marginal funding in the total  Central 
Bank funding . The same  policy stance is maintained in December, in order to better assess the 
impact of weakening in economic activit y on inflation.  
At the beginning of 2017, to a vert the possible impacts of exchange rate volatility and 
unhealthy price formations diverging from economic fundamentals, the Bank has launched a 
policy framework which included  dynamic and different liquidity instruments . Accordingly, the 
CBRT did not launch one -week repo auctions starting from 12 January 2017 and the banks’ 
borrowing limits at the Interbank Money Market established within the CBRT were reduced. 
On the days deemed necessary as of Janu ary 16, the amount of funding provided by the CBRT 
through Borsa Istanbul repo markets was limited. Additionally, foreign exchange reserve 
requirement ratios have been reduced by 50 basis points for all maturity brackets.  Moreover, to 
enhance flexibility a nd instrument diversity of the Turkish lira and FX liquidity management 
within the current monetary and exchange rate policy framework, Foreign Exchange Deposits 
against Turkish Lira Deposits market was opened on 17 January 2017.Excessive fluctuations in 
exchange rates weighed on upside risks to the inflation outlook.  Due to lagged effects of these 
developments and the volatility in unprocessed food prices, the hikes in inflation are expected 
to continue in the short term. Accordingly, the Bank  decided to strengthen the monetary 
tightening to contain the deterioration in  inflation outlook.  Thus, in January 2017, the marginal 
funding rate was raised from 8.5 percent to 9.25 percent, and the CBRT’s borrowing rate under 
the Late Liquidity Window Facility, was  increased from 10 percent to 11 percent (Chart 1).  
 
 TÜRKİYE CUMHURİYET MERKEZ BANKASI A.Ş  
TİCARET SİCİL NUMARASI: 269  
SERMAYESİ: 25.000 TL  
İDARE MERKEZ İ, ANKARA  
(CENTRAL  BANK  OF THE  REPUBLIC  OF TURKEY)  Anafa rtalar Mh. İstiklal Cad. 10 06050  Ulus-Altındağ - ANKA RA 
Tel: ( 90-312) 507 50 00 Fax : (90 312) 507 56 40  
E-Mail: iletisimbilgi@tcmb.gov.tr Swift: tcmbtr2a  
Web: http://www.tcmb.gov.tr  
  
 
Chart 1  
CBRT Rates and BIST Interbank O/N Rates (Percent)  Chart 2  
Currency Swap Rates  
(Percent)  
 
  
Source: BIST, CBRT.      Source: CBRT.  
 
The initial effects of the monetary tightening  have  been extremely powerful. Owing to 
the Central Bank  policies, the depreciation trend in the Turkish lira has come to a halt and the 
yield curve has flattened (Chart 2).  
In addition to the interest rate and Turkish lira liquidity actions, the Central Bank also 
took measures to support the fo reign exchange liquidity ; in response to the exchange rate 
volatility realized in the second part of 2016. In this respect, the bank has provided extra 
foreign exchange liquidity to the financial system, by gradually red ucing the foreign exchange 
reserve requirements and the reserve option coefficients.  Furthermore, in order to enhance  the 
flexibility of the FX liquidity management of banks, the average amount  of reserve 
requirement s that banks can hold in the maintenance period was raised  to 4 percent from 3 
percent . In addition, arrangements were made to extend the maturity of the export rediscount 
credits and to make their repayment in Turkish lira s until the end of the year. Measu res such as 
reimposing the  cap on FX collateral deposits  and partial provision of  the FX liquidity needs of 
energy importing public firm s by the CBRT and the Treasury  also supported the foreign 
exchange liquidity in the market.   
In sum, throughout 2016, in order to limit the adverse effects of volatilities in the global 
and domestic financial markets, the Bank has maintained its stance  that aims to  balance foreign 
exchange liquidity and support financial stability .  
Given a tight policy s tance that focuses on bringing inflation down, the 5 -percent target 
is expected to be achieved gradually; inflation is likely to stabilize around 5 percent as of 2019 
after falling to 8 percent in 2017 and to 6 percent in 2018 (Chart 3). Assumptions on whi ch the TÜRKİYE CUMHURİYET MERKEZ BANKASI A.Ş  
TİCARET SİCİL NUMARASI: 269  
SERMAYESİ: 25.000 TL  
İDARE MERKEZ İ, ANKARA  
(CENTRAL  BANK  OF THE  REPUBLIC  OF TURKEY)  Anafa rtalar Mh. İstiklal Cad. 10 06050  Ulus-Altındağ - ANKA RA 
Tel: ( 90-312) 507 50 00 Fax : (90 312) 507 56 40  
E-Mail: iletisimbilgi@tcmb.gov.tr Swift: tcmbtr2a  
Web: http://www.tcmb.gov.tr  
 predictions are based coupled with the risks to the inflation outlook are elaborated on in the 
January 2017 Inflation Report.  
 
Chart 3  
Inflation and Output Gap Forecasts  
 
* Shaded area denotes the 70 percent confidence interval for the forecast.  
 
 
Conclusion  
The Central Bank will continue to employ all tools at its disposal to achieve the main 
objective of price stability. Monetary policy decisions will be dependent on the inflation 
outlook in the period ahead. By closely monitoring the inflation  expectations, pricing behaviors 
and developments in other factors affecting inflation additional monetary tightening may be 
implemented if deemed necessary. Moreover, necessary measures will be taken against 
unhealthy price formations in the foreign excha nge market that are inconsistent with economic 
fundamentals.  
Although the monetary policy framework  contribute to fighting against inflation, 
experiences under the inflation targeting regime  point to the need of a joint effort in 
maintaining permanent price  stability. In recent years,  concurrent shocks and structural factors 
kept inflation volatile and above the target. In achieving permanent price stability , it is 
important to  enhance cooperation and coordination among relevant institutions. Accordingl y, 
the Food and Agricultural Products Markets Monitoring and Evaluation Committee constitutes 
a valuable example . The recently pronounced  efforts to manage foreign exchange risk from a 
financial stability perspective will support the effectiveness of the m onetary policy and  the fight TÜRKİYE CUMHURİYET MERKEZ BANKASI A.Ş  
TİCARET SİCİL NUMARASI: 269  
SERMAYESİ: 25.000 TL  
İDARE MERKEZ İ, ANKARA  
(CENTRAL  BANK  OF THE  REPUBLIC  OF TURKEY)  Anafa rtalar Mh. İstiklal Cad. 10 06050  Ulus-Altındağ - ANKA RA 
Tel: ( 90-312) 507 50 00 Fax : (90 312) 507 56 40  
E-Mail: iletisimbilgi@tcmb.gov.tr Swift: tcmbtr2a  
Web: http://www.tcmb.gov.tr  
 against inflation. In addition, enhancing the coordination between monetary and fiscal policies 
will also support the struggle against  inflation.  
The January 2017 Inflation Report, published on our website today, which 
comprehensively presents the developments regarding inflation and monetary policy as well as 
our medium -term forecasts, is enclosed for your information.  
Yours Sincerely,  
 
 
 
CENTRAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY  
      Head Office  
 
 
 Murat Çetinkaya                      Murat Uysal  
     Governor                   Deputy Governor  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enc: January 2017  Inflation Report  