1 
   
 
No: 2017 -07 
PRESS RELEASE   
31 January  2017  
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING   
Meeting Date : 24 January  2017  
Inflation Developments  
1. In December, consumer prices were up 1.64 percent, while annual inflation rose by 
1.53 points to 8.53 percent. As stated in December’s Summary of the Monetary 
Policy Committee Meeting, annual food inflation soared amid higher unprocessed 
food prices, while  energy inflation continued to climb  due to the outlook for 
exchange rates and oil prices. In addition, recent tax adjustments, particularly on 
tobacco, put a marked upward pressure on inflation. Moreover, the plunging Turkish 
lira drove the annual inflati on and underlying trend of core indicators higher.  
2. Annual inflation in food and non -alcoholic beverages surged by 2.10 points to 5.65 
percent, largely due to unprocessed food prices rising amid adverse weather 
conditions and exchange rate developments . Ann ual processed food inflation 
remained virtually flat . Leading indicators for January  signal  a continued uptrend  in 
annual food inflation on the back of unprocessed food prices . Energy prices 
increased by 2.15  percent  in December, with the upswing spread ac ross all 
subcategories due to soaring oil prices and the tumbling Turkish lira . Thus, annual 
energy inflation increased by a total  of 5.70  points in the last four months to 8.67  
percent. Leading indicators suggest that energy inflation has remained on the rise 
over January due to exchange rate changes . 
3. Prices of services edged up by 0.38 percent, while  annual services inflation rose  by 
0.17 points to 8.11  percent in December . Annual inflation decreased in transport, 
remained almost flat  in communication and went up in other sub categories . The 
slowdown in  domestic demand and the sluggish tourism industry  spilled over into 
prices of services , while several  subcategories  reflected the effect s of the Turkish lira 
depreciation . 
4. Annual core go ods inflation inched up by 0.84 points to 6.77 percent in December. 
Annual inflation decreased in clothing, but increased in other subcategories. Among 
durables goods, all subcategories, home appliances in particular, saw considerable 
price hikes. Automobi le prices were affected by the SCT hike, along with exchange 
2 
 rate developments. The depreciation in the Turkish lira was evident in core good 
prices in December despite restrictive domestic demand conditions . 
5. Although aggregate demand conditions  put a downward pressure, inflation is 
expected to remain on an upward track  in the short term due to the lagged 
exchange rate pass -through and volatile unprocessed food prices.  
Factors Affecting Inflation   
6. Recent data indicate that economic activity rebounded somewhat in the fourth 
quarter after the third -quarter deceleration. Despite a mild production growth 
across exporting industries, sectors with a relatively higher sensitivity to domestic 
demand weakene d, causing  industrial output  to remain  flat in November. Data on 
the production of electricity and vehicles and exports point to a modest  growth in 
industrial output for December . Thus, industrial production is likely to post a 
quarterly gain in the fourth quarter thanks to the base effect coming from working 
day adjustment . However, apart from the technical recovery driven by working day 
effects, there is only a moderate recovery  in economic activity which is  not evenly 
spread  across all sectors .  
7. Current data indicate the external demand was more robust than domestic demand 
in the fourth quarter. Non -gold exports were up quarter -on-quarter in the October -
November period, while no n-gold imports edged down. Likewise, the PMI’s new 
export orders rose above the neutral mark in the fourth quarter, while total orders 
posted a small quarterly gain. In this period, domestic sales of automobiles and 
home appliances were robust amid  brought -forward demand, whereas the demand 
for services was on the decline, particularly in retail.  
8. Economic activity is expected to recover further amid accommodative incentives 
and measures. The data on mortgage and auto markets accompanied by the recent 
recove ry in consumer loans bolster the projections for a gradual improvement. 
Moreover, the public sector is expected to provide further investment support to 
growth in the coming months.  
9. The growing EU demand continues to stimulate total exports, the auto industry in 
particular. Turkey’s flexibility in diversif ying markets  continues to cushion exports 
against the negative effects of geopolitical tensions on external demand. 
Furthermore, the newly -restored relations with neighbor countries translated into a 
boost for exports. The sluggish outlook in  tourism sector  continues to have a 
negative impact on the current account balance, which, however, is alleviated by 
the lagged pass -through of terms -of-trade developments and the moderate course 
of loans. However,  commodity prices are expected to gradually have a less of a 
positive influence  on the current account deficit in the upcoming period.  
10.  The deterioration in the labor market, which began in May, continued through 
October. This period saw modest increases i n services and industrial employment in 
contrast to a decline in the construction sector. Meanwhile, leading indicators such 3 
 as new job vacancies and unemployment insurance claims suggest that employment 
remains subdued and unemployment rates will continue  to remain high.   
11.  In sum, economic activity slightly recovered in the fourth quarter and is expected to 
record a moderate growth in 2016. However, reverberations of recent market 
volatility through confidence channel, the potential impact of recent globa l and 
geopolitical developments on financial conditions  and the lack of any signs of 
improvement in tourism outlook limit the pace of economic recovery.   
Monetary Policy and Risks  
12. Following the US elections in November 2016, global economic uncertainties 
intensified. In this period, long -term interest rates increased in advanced 
economies, while capital flows towards emerging economies subsided. The 
increased likelihood of the adoption of protective policies in the US following the 
elections poses a downsi de risk to the pace of growth and employment in emerging 
economies. In addition, the increased possibility of accommodative fiscal policies to 
be adopted by the US may lead to accelerated rate hikes by the Fed, which may 
result in further tightening of fin ancial conditions in emerging economies.  
13. Not only the ongoing uncertainties in global markets but also the geopolitical and 
domestic developments caused fluctuations in domestic financial markets in the 
fourth quarter of 2016. The adverse impact of these o n financial conditions are 
partially counterbalanced through liquidity measures, macroprudential policies and 
other incentives. In fact, consumer loans and TL -denominated commercial loans 
have recently been signaling for recovery. On the other hand, tax ar rangements 
done in the last quarter of the year, coupled with exchange rate developments led 
the demand for automobiles and durable goods to be brought forward at end -2016. 
Thus, the revival in consumer loans may lose some pace in the first quarter of 2017 . 
14. Recently -released data hint at a noticeable economic slowdown in the third quarter 
of the year. Thanks to the accommodative incentives and measures, domestic 
demand recorded an improvement in the last quarter. Nevertheless, sectoral 
diffusion of this imp rovement remained limited and underlying trend  of economic 
activity registered a mild growth. Recent indicators suggest that the depreciation in 
the Turkish lira and the repercussions through confidence channel  may lead to a 
slowdown in domestic demand in the first quarter of the year. However, as 
uncertainties and volatility in financial markets wane, the economy is expected to 
revert to its underlying trend in the ensuing period and display a moderate growth 
in 2017.  On the other hand, the pace of recover y in tourism revenues, the global 
economic outlook, uncertainties regarding the monetary policies of advanced 
economies and geopolitical developments pose downside risks to the economic 
activity , while possible lagged effects of recent incentives and measu res are 
considered as the upside risk factor. Retaining price stability as the main objective, 
the CBRT closely monitors also the reverberations of the downside risks to economic 
activity on financial stability.  4 
 15. The Committee evaluated medium -term projections to be presented in the January 
Inflation Report in the meeting.  In the last quarter, inflation increased due to the 
energy, alcohol -tobacco and unprocessed food groups. Although aggregate demand 
conditions continued to be disinflationary , rises  in the exchange rate and commodity 
prices increased the underlying trend of core inflation. In the short term, the base 
effect from unprocessed food prices and developments in the TL -denominated 
import prices are expected to drive inflation upwards  signif icantly . Hence, it is 
projected that despite the restrictive effect of the mild course of aggregate demand, 
inflation will remain high for a while due to cost pressures, and display a gradual 
decline as of the second half of the year. Forecasts are based o n the assumption 
that despite the tourism -induced slowdown in food demand and the support from 
the actions taken by the Food Committee, the base effect from unprocessed food 
prices, the probable effects of the adverse weather conditions on the food supply 
and the exchange rate developments will push the end -2017 food inflation upwards 
compared to the figures of the previous report.  Accordingly, year -end inflation 
forecasts for 2017 and 2018 were revised upwards by 1.5 and 1 points, respectively 
compared t o the October Inflation Report.  Given a tight policy stance that focuses 
on bringing inflation down , inflation is likely to be 8 percent in 2017, 6 percent in 
2018 and stabilize around 5 percent in 2019 .  
16. There are both downside and upside risks to inflation  forecasts, yet upside risks to 
end-2017 inflation forecast seem more evident.  Recently, the marked rise in foreign 
exchange market volatility pose s an upside risk to inflation from expectations and 
pricing behavior channels as well as from the cost channel. On the other hand, the 
projected disinflationary effect of demand conditions may be higher, if economic 
activity recovers slower than expected in the period ahead. Risks to food inflation -
another factor shaping forecasts - are considered to b e balanced. Despite the 
possibility of food inflation to prove higher than expected still resides amid adverse 
weather conditions and the reverberations of the exchange rate, measures taken by 
the Food Committee are believed to counterbalance these risks. The CBRT will  
closely monitor the developments regarding inflation outlook  and continue to take 
necessary policy measures to achieve price stability.  
17. Against this background, starting from January 2017, the CBRT took a series of 
liquidity measures in respo nse to the excessive exchange rate volatility and 
deterioration in the inflation outlook and decided to strengthen the tight monetary  
policy  stance in the January MPC Meeting. In this respect, the marginal funding rate 
and the late liquidity window lending  rate were hiked by 75 and 100 basis points to 
9.25 and 11 percent, respectively.  The CBRT will continue to use all available 
instruments in pursuit of the price stability objective. Future monetary policy 
decisions will be conditional on the inflation out look. Inflation expectations, pricing 
behavior and other factors affecting inflation will be closely monitored and, if 
needed, further monetary tightening will be delivered. Moreover, necessary 5 
 liquidity measures will be taken in case of unhealthy pricing behavior in the foreign 
exchange market that cannot be justified by economic fundamentals.  
18. The fact that the excessive volatility observed in the foreign exchange market in 
January 2017 was not accompanied by a change in macro framework or economic 
fundamentals, required a dynamic tightening practice inclusive of alternative 
liquidity instrument s. While a simple policy framework enhances the effectiveness 
of transmission mechanism, it does not rule out these type of dynamic reactions.   
19. Developments in fiscal policy and tax adjustments are monitored closely with regard 
to their effects on the infl ation outlook. The contribution of adjustments in 
administered prices to consumer inflation in 2016 was above historical averages. 
This emerged as one of the main determinants of higher inflation than the CBRT’s 
forecasts issued at the start of the year. T he baseline monetary policy stance for the 
upcoming period is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be 
maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices. A 
revision of the monetary policy stance may be conside red, should the fiscal policy 
deviate significantly from this framework, and consequently have an adverse effect 
on the medium -term inflation outlook.  
20. In recent years, sustaining fiscal discipline has become one of the major factors in 
reducing the sensiti vity of the Turkish economy against external shocks. Moreover, 
the room provided by the fiscal discipline facilitates the countercyclical 
implementation of the fiscal policy in periods of slowing economic activity without a 
permanent deterioration in budge t balances, as in 2016. Nevertheless , designing 
public spending and tax policies in a way that takes into account the subsequent 
effects on macroeconomic variables  other than fiscal accounts  such as growth, 
domestic savings and inflation , will contribute to the coordination of monetary 
policy and fiscal policy, and enhance macroeconomic stability.  
 
 