  
 
No: 2017 -25 
PRESS  RELEASE  
22 June  2017  
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING   
Meeting Date : 15 June  2017  
Inflation Developments  
1. In May, consumer prices were up 0.45 percent and annual inflation fell 0.15 points to 
11.72 percent. Food inflation remained on the rise while energy inflation continued 
to slow. The lagged effects of the cumulative Turkish lira depreciation continued to weigh upon  core goods whereas annual core goods inflation declined due to the 
methodology change to clothing prices. Adjusted for these  transient effects, the  
improvement in  underlying inflation remained limited  in this period.  
2. Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 1.28 points to 16.91 percent in May largely due to the annual fresh f ruits and vegetables inflation that hit 
48 percent. Price hikes were also common across  food excluding fresh fruits and 
vegetables, notably in red meat. Leading indicators for June signal that annual food inflation will decrease on the back of the base eff ect from unprocessed food. Annual 
energy inflation fell further in May due to exchange rates and lower oil prices, to 8.72 percent. Leading indicators suggest that annual energy inflation has continued to slow in June.  
3. Prices of services rose by 0.93 perce nt while annual services inflation edged up by 
0.19 points to 9.06 percent in May. Factors affecting services inflation included cost increases driven by exchange rates and food prices and indexation to headline 
inflation.  
4. Annual core goods inflation dropp ed by 0.31 points to 9.71 percent in May, mainly 
due to the temporary impact of the methodology change to weight system of the 
clothing category. In non- clothing categories, annual inflation continued to climb 
because of the  lagged spillovers of the cumulative Turkish lira depreciation. More 
specifically, prices soared at a much faster rate than historical averages across core 
goods excluding clothing and durables.  
5. All in all, inflation  remains high . Despite recent cost developments and the expected 
partial improvement in food prices,  risks  to the pricing behavior still  prevail.  
 
1 
 Factors Affecting Inflation  
6. In the first quarter, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) expanded by 5.0  percent year-
on-year  and 1.4 percent quarter -on-quarter, thus indicating economic activity pick ed 
up further. Key drivers of quarterly growth were, in sequence, exports, construction 
investments and public consumption. Machinery and equipment investments 
remained sluggish, while private consumption slowed due to demand being br ought 
forward. The high contribution from net exports to quarterly growth translates into  a 
growth composition buoying up the current account balance.  
7. Leading indicators hint at a strengthening economic recovery in  the second quarter. 
April’s industrial production and May PMI data signaled a more robust increase for 
the second quarter than in the previous one. Not only the manufacturing industry, 
but also services, retail trade and construction saw strengthening activity recently. 
Accordingly, economic recovery appears to be more widespread across sectors . 
8. A similar outlook is also visible in demand indicators. Both consumer confidence and investment tendency have improved recently. The consumer demand for categories  
subject to incentives remains strong while investments signal some pickup after the 
subdued course  in the first quarter. Domestic demand is likely to make more 
contribution to growth in the second quarter.  
9. Domestic demand keeps recovering while  net exter nal demand spurs growth amid  
robust increases in exports of goods that spill over into a wide range of  sectors  and 
destinations. The improving growth outlook across the globe, particularly for the EU , 
and Turkey’s flexibility  to shift markets abroad  continue  to stimulate exports . 
Increases in exports of goods slow down the deterioration of  the current account 
deficit and help improve core current account deficit indicators . Strong  course of  
exports of goods are  expected to continue to contribute positively to the current 
account . 
10. The labor market picked up in March for the second month in a row. In this period, non-farm employment recorded an uptick , particularly in construction and industrial 
sectors. Although econom ic recovery has yet to fully seep  through to the labor market  
in the first quarter , March data and leading indicators show a more upbeat picture for 
the second quarter. With a more solid economic rebound,  employment gains will 
likely be more notable in the upcoming period while unemployme nt rates may  decline  
further . 
11. In sum , recent data indicate a strengthening recovery in economic activity. Domestic 
demand  has improve d and the growing EU demand continues to contribute positively 
to exports.  Economic activity is expected to strengthen further  amid  supportive 
incentives and measures . The Committee  assesses that implementing structural 
reforms would augment  potential growth significantly . 
 
 
2 
 Monetary Policy and Risks  
12. Global economic activity continues to improve. This improvement, which appear s 
simultaneously in advanced and emerging economies , accompany the upward 
revision in global growth forecasts, and they both underpin the optimism in global 
markets. Inflation still hovers l ow despite the favorable growth outlook, which leads 
advanced econ omies to sustain the accommodative monetary policy stance. In 
addition, due to the perceptions for a milder  monetary tightening by the Fed, global 
risk appetite hit historically high levels, and emerging economies saw accelerated 
portfolio inflows as of March 2017.  
13. Despite the recovery in global economic activity, energy prices, which have recently 
been on the decline, lend the inflation prospects and current account  balance  a 
helping  hand. The recent favorable outlook notwithstanding, downside risks to global 
economy still reside.  Blurred process of the Fed’s balance sheet downsizing, the political climate in Europe, the course of Brexit talks and geopolitical developments 
are the factors that may alter the risk sentiment in a short time.  
14. Thanks also to the tight monetary policy stance, Turkey still diverges positively from 
other emerging economies in the exchange rate and risk p remium indicators. Backed 
by macroprudential policies an d credit guarantee support, retail loans and TL -
denominated business loans has grown considerably since the start of the year. In the banking sector , as the supply -side effects step in, the fast loan growth is expected to 
be soon replaced by a milder outlo ok. The improvement in credits is monitored 
closely with regard to the extent of their impact on the aggregate demand and economic activity.  
15. Recently- released indicators confirm that downside risks to economic activity have 
abated and the economic rebound will prove more robust as of the second quarter of the year. Thus, growth prospects for 2017 recorded a progress. To urism revenues 
stabilized relatively, the cumulative depreciation affected net exports positively and 
trade relations with Russia started to  normalize, which all underpin growth. What is 
more, the measures and incentive packages to boost consumption and investment 
expe nditures , reduced  uncertainty and improved financial conditions contribute to 
growth. On the other hand, the pace of recovery i n tourism revenues, uncertainties 
regarding monet ary policies of advanced economies, the course of capital flows and 
geopolitical developments constitute a downside risk to growth also in 2017 , as it has 
recently . 
16. The recent stable course of the Turkish li ra and the falling commodity prices 
notwithstanding, cumulative effects of cost factors on inflation lingers. The correction in food prices has not reached desired levels  yet, thus  requires a cautious stance 
regarding the permanence of the sizeable decreases expected in June and July to result from the base effect in the group’s inflation. Moreover, temporary tax reductions in white goods and furniture sectors to be taken back in Oct ober 
accompanied by the effects of the methodological changes  in the clothing group are 
3 
 also noted as the developments envisaged to cause fluctuations in inflation in the 
short term. Additionally, the Committee evaluated that as the improvement in 
economic  activity gets stronger, demand conditions will offer less support to the 
disinflation process.  
17. In short, although recent improvements in cost factors and expected partial correction in food prices will contribute to disinflation, current elevated levels o f 
inflation pose risks to the pricing behavior. Accordingly, the Committee decided to 
maintain the tight stance of monetary policy at the June Meeting, and kept the lending rate at 12.25 percent under the Late Liquidity Window. The Central Bank will contin ue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability objective. 
Tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained until inflation outlook displays a significant improvement. Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors affec ting inflation will be closely monitored and, if needed, further monetary 
tightening will be delivered . 
18. Developments in fiscal policy and tax adjustments are monitored closely with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline monetary pol icy stance for the 
upcoming period is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices  and taxes . 
A revision of the monetary policy stance may be considered, should th e fiscal policy 
deviate significantly from this framework and have an adverse effect on the medium -
term inflation outlook.  
19. In recent years, sustained fiscal discipline has been one of key factors in lowering the 
sensitivity of the Turkish economy against e xternal shocks. Thanks to the room for 
maneuver provided by fiscal discipline, stabilizing fiscal policy could have been 
implemented recently. Structural measures, which would improve the potential to 
implement countercyclical fiscal policy, will contribut e to the coordination of 
monetary and fiscal policy, and thus support macroeconomic stability.  
 
 
4 
 