1 
   
 
No: 2017 -31 
PRESS RELEASE  
1 August  2017  
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date : 27 July 2017  
Inflation Developments  
1. In June, consumer prices were down  0.27 percent and annual inflation decreased by  
0.82 points to 10.90  percent . Food inflation dropped on the back of fresh fruits and 
vegetables while annual energy inflation continued to decelerate. The lagged effects 
of the cumulative Turkish lira depreciation continued to weigh upon core goods 
whereas annual core goods inflation  declined due to prices of durable goods. There 
is an improvement in underlying inflation in this period, even after adjusting for the 
transient effects of the methodology change in the clothing price index.  
2. Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic bevera ges fell by 2.57 points to 14.34 
percent in June due to the reduction in annual fresh fruits and vegetables inflation 
coming from the base effect. On the other hand, annual inflation remained on the 
rise across food excluding fresh fruits and vegetables, w ith red meat prices 
recording large increases. Leading indicators for July signal that annual food inflation 
will continue to decrease owing to the base effect from unprocessed food. Annual 
energy inflation fell further in June amid a more favorable exchan ge rate and oil 
price outlook. Yet, recent developments may lead to a slight pick up in July’s energy 
inflation.  
3. Prices of services rose by 0.53 percent while annual services inflation inched up by 
0.12 points to 9.18 percent in June amid factors such as ri sing transport prices 
driven by the lagged effects of increased fuel prices, and higher catering prices due 
to the indirect effects of increased food inflation, particularly in red meat. In 
addition to cost increases driven by exchange rates, fuel prices a nd food prices, 
factors affecting services inflation also include indexation to headline inflation.  
4. Annual core goods inflation dropped by 0.51 points to 9.20 percent in June on the 
back of durable goods prices due to recent outlook in Turkish lira. Meanwh ile, 
annual clothing inflation remained relatively flat in this period. Across core goods 
excluding clothing and durables, monthly price hikes have abated yet annual 
inflation remained high because of the lagged spillovers of the cumulative Turkish 
lira de preciation.  
2 
 5. In sum, inflation edged down but still remains high. Despite the disinflationary 
impact of recent cost developments and a likely partial correction in food prices, the 
high inflation remains a risk to the pricing behavior.  
Factor s Affecting I nflation 
6. Recently released data indicate an ongoing recovery in the economic activity. A n 
evaluation of April and May industrial production figures jointly suggests a stronger 
quarter -on-quarter increase in the second quarter. Survey indicators of June show 
that this outlook will be maintained. Not only the manufacturing industry, but also 
services, retail trade and construction saw strengthening activity recently. 
Accordingly, economic recovery appears to be more widespread across sectors.  
7. A similar out look is also visible in demand indicators. Both consumer confidence and 
investment tendency have improved recently. The consumer demand for categories 
subject to incentives remains strong while investments signal some pickup after the 
subdued course in the  first quarter. Domestic demand is likely to make more 
contribution to growth in the second quarter.  
8. Domestic demand keeps recovering while net external demand spurs growth amid 
increases in exports of goods that spill over into a wide range of sectors. Th e 
improving growth outlook across the globe, particularly for the EU, the course of the 
real exchange rate and Turkey’s flexibility to shift markets abroad continue to 
stimulate exports. Increases in exports of goods slow down the deterioration of the 
current account deficit and help improve core current account deficit indicators. In 
addition to the expected partial recovery in tourism, the uptrend in exports of goods 
is envisaged to contribute further to the current account balance.  
9. The uptick in the labo r market, which started in February and March, grew more 
apparent in April period. Supported by rising employment in non -farm sectors, 
unemployment rate records a decline. Leading indicators hint at a further decrease 
in unemployment rate amid the economic  recovery.  
10. In sum, recent data indicate that the economic activity will maintain its strength due 
to the supportive measures and incentives provided recently. Domestic demand 
conditions have improved and demand from the European Union economies 
continues t o contribute positively to exports. The rebound in economic activity will 
bear favorable effects on the labor market in the upcoming period as well.  
Monetary Policy and Risks  
11. The mild recovery in global economic activity became more pronounced particularly  
due to advanced economies in the first quarter of 2017. The considerable fall in 
volatility in global financial markets and the increased the risk appetite reinforces 
the support of global financial conditions on economic activity. Moreover, the 
optimisti c outlook in the consumer and the real sector confidence indices and the 
favorable course of some commodity prices, chiefly oil, also improve expectations 
regarding global economic activity. The favorable global growth outlook and the 3 
 resulting fall in une mployment notwithstanding, the normalization process in 
monetary policies of advanced economies is believed to prove mild due to the 
absence of an apparent inflationist pressure related to wage increases. These factors 
keep portfolio inflows to emerging ec onomies brisk including Turkey.  
12. Despite the current favorable outlook in global economic activity, downside risks to 
global economy reside as well. In particular, should the normalization process of the 
Fed’s policy -rate increase and the balance sheet down sizing prove faster than 
expected, the high risk appetite and low volatility cycle in financial markets may 
reverse. That may generate fluctuations in prices of securities in advanced 
economies and weaken the growth trend. Moreover, fading risk appetite ma y cause 
fluctuations in portfolio flows to emerging economies as well. In addition to these, 
the course of Brexit talks and effects of the blurred global economic policies like 
foreign trade protectionism that is on the agenda of many countries, particular ly the 
US, are monitored closely.  
13. In line with the positive course of the global financial markets, domestic financial 
conditions also proved more supportive of economic activity in the second quarter. 
This was driven by macroprudential policies, public me asures and incentives and 
acceleration of the credits secured by the Credit Guarantee Fund (CGF), for which 
the limits were raised and terms of use were facilitated as of March. On the other 
hand, owing to strong capital inflows to especially the GDDS mark ets as of March, 
the share of foreign investors within the GDDS stock increased, and the Treasury 
increased foreign borrowing due to bulky foreign demand, which offered domestic 
banks a considerable room on the supply side. As the upper limit defined in cr edits 
secured by the CGF is near and as the supply -side effects have recently stepped in 
the banking sector, credit growth which lost pace starting from June is expected to 
be balanced at milder levels as of the second half of the year. The improvement in 
credits in the first half of the year is monitored closely with regard to the extent of 
their impact on the aggregate demand and economic activity.  
14. Recently -released indicators confirm the previous view that downside risks to 
economic activity have abated and the economic recovery will prove more robust as 
of the second quarter of the year. Signals for a wider sectoral spillover of the pickup 
in economic activity led by exporting sectors compared to the previous periods are 
important to a stable recovery in  growth. The gradual improvement in tourism 
revenues, the strengthened confidence channel, the positive effect of the 
cumulative depreciation on net exports and the normalization of commercial 
relations with Russia support growth. Moreover, the measures an d incentive 
packages to boost consumption and investment expenditures, reduced uncertainty 
and improved financial conditions will continue to spur growth. The improvement in 
employment and the fall in unemployment rate on the back of the ongoing recovery 
constitute a ground for the maintenance of this trend and increased contribution of 
domestic demand to growth. Investment is envisaged to exhibit a gradual 
improvement as uncertainties wane and the climate of confidence grows stronger. 4 
 On the other hand, th e pace of recovery in tourism revenues, uncertainties 
regarding monetary policies of advanced economies, the course of capital flows and 
geopolitical developments constitute a downside risk to growth also in 2017, as they 
have recently.  
15. The favorable effec ts of the monetary tightening on inflation have become visible. 
Consumer inflation receded following on the back of falling oil prices and the recent 
stable course of the Turkish lira and remained broadly consistent with the forecasts 
in the April Inflatio n Report. The medium -term inflation outlook seems to have 
improved since the previous Reporting period, and the recovery in underlying 
inflation is expected to continue gradually. However, considering that the rigidity in 
expectations and the pricing behav ior resides to a great extent, the improvement in 
the core inflation outlook, which is not yet deemed satisfactory, requires a tight 
monetary policy stance.  
16. The Committee evaluated medium -term projections to be presented in the July 
Inflation Report in the  meeting.  Accordingly, year -end inflation forecast was revised 
upwards by 0.2 points for 2017, while it was kept unchanged for 2018 compared to 
the 2017 April Inflation Report. Given a tight policy stance that focuses on bringing 
inflation down, inflation is estimated to converge gradually to the 5 -percent target. 
Accordingly, inflation is likely to be 8.7 percent at end -2017, and stabilize around 5 
percent in the medium term after falling to 6.4 percent in 2018.  
17. Although the highest inflation levels of the  year are left behind, inflation is likely to 
follow a fluctuating course in the second half. The correction in food prices is yet to 
be at a favored level , which necessitates a cautious evaluation of how permanent 
the recent decline in the group’s inflati on due to the base effects will be. 
Further more, temporary tax reductions in white goods and the furniture sector to 
be taken back in October as well as the effects driven by methodological changes 
stand out as factors that will lead to fluctuations in inf lation in the short term and 
temporary increases in core inflation. The inflation outlook is projected to recover 
starting from the last month of the year, and become more evident in the early 
months of 2018.  
18. Against this background, the C ommittee  decided to maintain the tight monetary 
policy stance in its July meeting and kept the Late Liquidity Window lending rate 
constant at 12.25 percent. The CBRT  will continue to use all available instruments in 
pursuit of the price stability objective. Tight stance in monetary policy will be 
maintained until inflation outlook displays a significant improvement. The CBRT 
formulates monetary policy by taking the medium -term inflation into account, thus 
focusing on the developments in underlying inflation rather than the anticipated 
fluctuations driven by the base effects during the course of the year. Inflation 
expectations, pricing behavior and other factors affecting inflation will be closely 
monitored and further monetary tightening will be delivered if needed . 5 
 19. Developments in fiscal policy and tax adjustments are monitored closely with regard 
to their effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline monetary policy stance for the 
upcoming period is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be 
maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices and 
taxes. A revision of the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal 
policy deviate significantly from this framework, and consequently have an adverse 
effect on the medium -term inflation outlook.  
20. In recent years, sustained fiscal discipline has been one of key factors in lowering 
the sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external shocks. The room provided 
by fiscal discipline facilitated the implementation of  expansionary fiscal policy. 
Structural measures to provide room for counter -cyclical fiscal policies will enhance 
the coordination of monetary and fiscal policy, and improve macroeconomic 
stability.  