No: 2017-32

PRESS RELEASE
18 August 2017

Food and Agricultural Product Markets Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee Convened
The Food and Agricultural Product Markets Monitoring and Evaluation Committee
(the Committee) met under the presidency of Deputy Prime Minister Mehmet
Şimşek. Main topics discussed at the meeting were the livestock feed costs, livestock
support programs and licensed warehouse utilization models as well as the structural
issues regarding the fresh fruit-vegetable supply chain.
A summary of the agenda and the decisions made are given below.
 Measures towards minimizing the loss rates along the fresh fruit-vegetable
supply chain, which have reached an average of 25-30 percent and thus led to
a significant financial loss, and increasing the overall quality of logistics
processes were discussed. In this framework, new standards were set
concerning the packaging of products after harvest in single-use and reusable
packages conforming to international norms, the transportation of products in
refrigerated vehicles to improve the transport processes, and the display of
products in refrigerated shelves in retail stores. Decisions were made
regarding the transition to the mandatory implementation of these standards
and the management of this transition process.
 The progress made in the work for the modernization of wholesale markets
was evaluated and the Committee was informed about the steps planned to
be taken. The Committee decided to discuss this topic as the main agenda
item in the next Committee meeting and settle the critical issues.

Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)
Head Office
Anafartalar Mahallesi İstiklal Caddesi 10 06050 Ulus / Ankara
+90 (312) 507 50 00
www.tcmb.gov.tr

 The Committee decided to introduce an adjustment in customs duties on
various feedstuffs to reduce the livestock feed costs that account for
approximately 60 percent of meat production costs.
 Suggestions for measures to increase the effectiveness of livestock incentives
and subsidies were discussed.
 Issues regarding licensed warehousing practices and various warehouse
utilization models were discussed.


The agenda and the work schedule of the Committee were reviewed.

Contact: For further information, you may send an e-mail to basin@tcmb.gov.tr

Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)
Head Office
Anafartalar Mahallesi İstiklal Caddesi 10 06050 Ulus / Ankara
+90 (312) 507 50 00
www.tcmb.gov.tr

