1 
  
 
No: 2017 -40 
PRESS RELEASE  
1 November 2017  
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date : 26 October 2017  
Inflation Developments  
1. In September, consumer prices were up 0.65 percent and annual inflation rose by 
0.52 points to 11.20 percent. Annual inflation recorded a decline in the energy 
group due to the base effect, but increased in other subgroups. Food inflation 
increased due to the negative base effect in the unprocessed food group coupled 
with the spike in the processed food p rices. Core goods and services groups 
witnessed overall price hikes, while the rise in the clothing group is mainly 
attributed to the methodological change in the weighting system. These 
developments pushed both the annual inflation and the underlying tren d of core 
indicators higher.  
2. Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 0.53 points to 
12.50 percent in September. Both unprocessed and processed food prices recorded 
higher annual inflation rates. While this outlook on unprocessed fo od inflation was 
triggered by the base effect, the red meat prices are decreasing amid the measures 
in effect and seasonally -adjusted unprocessed food prices have been on the decline 
for the last three months. Leading indicators for October hint at a susta ined 
downtrend in unprocessed food prices. On the energy front, prices jumped in 
September amid price developments in oil and other inputs, and this trend 
continued in October.  
3. Prices of services rose by 1.04 percent and the annual services inflation reached 9.55 
percent in September. Price hikes spread across subgroups, and particularly striking 
were those in accommodation services and rent. Largely indexed to headline 
inflation, prices of educational services increased at a high rate in September as in 
August. Climbing inflation in services was driven both by increased costs and 
indexation to past inflation besides the robust course of economic activity.  
4. Annual core goods inflation increased by 1.62 points to 12.70 percent in September. 
All subgroups,  chiefly the clothing group saw higher annual inflation in this period. 
The recent upward course of core goods inflation was led by the lagged effects of 
the exchange rate, the strong course of economic activity and the clothing -driven 
2 
 methodological effec ts. The change in the weighting structure in clothing was 
mostly manifested itself in this period and accounted for nearly half of the rise in 
annual inflation in core indicators. Among durable goods, price hikes were more 
prevalent in automobiles and home  appliances, and monthly price increases in core 
goods excluding clothing and durable goods gained momentum. Indicators for 
October hint at an ongoing uptrend in core goods inflation. The termination of the 
temporary tax reductions in white goods and furni ture sector will also have a role in 
this uptrend. In addition, the weight update for clothing prices may still put upward 
pressure  in October , albeit to a lesser degree.  
5. In sum, current elevated levels of inflation and the developments on core inflation 
outlook continue to pose risks on the pricing behavior.  
Factor s Affecting Inflation  
6. Recently released data indicate a strong economic activity. July -August data on 
industrial production and September’s survey indicators suggest that industrial 
activity remains strong yet somewhat slower than in the second quarter. As growth 
becomes more w idespread across sectors, indicators for services and trade have 
also recorded substantial gains; the recovery in the tourism sector helped boost the 
economic activity, as well.  
7. A similar outlook is also evident in demand indicators. Private consumption pr ops up 
growth, while machinery and equipment investments have been increasingly 
displaying signs of recovery following a long spell of weak growth. Domestic demand 
is expected to provide added support to growth in the third quarter. The Committee 
reiterate d that annual growth will be much faster in the third quarter owing to 
strengthening economic activity as well as calendar and base effects.  
8. The improving growth outlook across the globe, particularly for the EU, and Turkey’s 
flexibility to shift markets a broad continue to stimulate exports. Despite that a slight 
deterioration in the current account deficit is expected in the next few months due 
to the recovery in domestic demand and base effects, the strong recovery in tourism 
and the uptrend in exports of  goods is envisaged to contribute further to the current 
account balance.  
9. The labor market improvement halted in July. In this period, construction 
employment increased whereas employment in industry and service sectors 
dropped compared to the previous period. Thus, despite the strong economy -wide 
growth, the labor market displa yed only a partial recovery. Survey data suggest that 
the weak July outlook was only temporary. Still, t he Committee noted that 
employment gains failed to fully pass through to unemployment rates due to the 
strong upward trend in the labor force participat ion rate.  
10. In short, economic activity was robust in the third quarter. Domestic demand 
conditions keep improving and the improving external demand, primarily from 
European Union economies, continues to contribute positively to exports. The 3 
 Committee assess es that the implementation of structural reforms would contribute 
to potential growth significantly.  
Monetary Policy and Risks  
11. The global economic upturn is expected to continue in the rest of 2017 and 
throughout 2018. Although financial market volatility slightly increased in the third 
quarter, global financial conditions remain accommodative as the risk appetite is still 
strong. Despite the third quarter’s higher crude oil prices driven by the benign global 
growth outlook, the OPEC output cut and the hurr icanes that hit the US oil 
production, demand and supply -side factors specific to the oil market are containing 
the upward pressures on energy prices. On the other hand, risks related to other 
commodity prices are on the upside due to the global growth out look.  
12. The primary downside risk to the global economic outlook is the uncertainty 
surrounding monetary policy normalization across advanced economies. The 
communication after the September meeting reinforced financial market 
expectations that the Fed will stick to its previously announced path of 
normalization. The Fed started reducing the size of its balance sheet in October. If 
the impending balance sheet downsizing of the Fed and other major central banks is 
introduced faster than expected, the high risk  appetite and low volatility cycle in 
financial markets may be reversed. In addition to these uncertainties regarding 
global economic policies, the lack of a clear -cut Brexit strategy, the tendency 
towards more inward -oriented policies in European economie s and the ongoing 
geopolitical turmoil in Asia and the Middle East stand out as other upcoming 
downside risks to financial markets and global growth. The fact that the size of 
private sector debt has reached high levels across some emerging economies, with  
China in the lead, might aggravate the impact of the ris ks related to financial 
markets . 
13. The favorable global economic outlook and trade volume as well as the ongoing 
global risk appetite prompted an upturn in portfolio flows toward emerging 
economies rec ently, but heightened geopolitical risks caused portfolio investments 
to lose momentum in Turkey. Turkey’s portfolio inflows have been more 
concentrated in government bonds since September whereas flows to the stock 
market remained volatile and weak. The v olatility in the foreign exchange market 
triggered a rise in long -term inflation compensation. Despite these developments, 
financial conditions remained mostly accommodative in the third quarter. Loan 
growth balanced at historical levels in the third quart er, as the loans guaranteed by 
the Credit Guarantee Fund almost reached the pre -determined upper limit. The 
strong acceleration of credit growth in the first half of the year and its phase -out in 
the second half are monitored closely with regard to their i mpact on aggrega te 
demand and economic activity . 
14. The third quarter’s economic activity and aggregate demand were mostly in line 
with the predictions of the previous Report. After the third quarter, domestic 4 
 demand might see some slowdown due to the reduced  support of the additional 
credit boost to growth and the termination of tax incentives for durable goods, and 
the economy is expected to move towards its underlying trend. Both the subsiding 
effect of the accommodative policies of 2017 and the fiscal meas ures announced in 
the recent Medium Term Program (MTP) are monitored closely with respect to their 
effect on economic activity. The continued recovery in tourism, the improving global 
growth outlook and the favorable course of the real exchange rate are ex pected to 
contribute further to growth and the current account balance in the coming months 
through the export channel. The improving perceptions regarding uncertainty will 
continue to bolster investment in the next quarter, as in the third quarter. As the  
recovery becomes widespread, it is expected that favorable tendency will take place 
in employment and investment, upholding economic growth. Against this 
background, uncertainties over monetary policies of major central banks, the course 
of capital flows and geopolitical developments remain key to economic activity. 
Exchange rate volatility that may arise from such factors poses a downside risk to 
the timing and strength of the support that financial conditions could provide to the 
economic activity.  
15. The C ommittee evaluated the medium -term projections to be presented in the final 
Inflation Report of the year. Accordingly, year -end inflation forecast was revised 
upwards by 1.1 points for 2017, and 0.6 points for 2018, compared to the 2017 July 
Inflation Repo rt. Given a tight policy stance that focuses on bringing inflation down, 
inflation is estimated to converge gradually to the 5 -percent target. Accordingly, 
inflation is likely to be 9.8 percent at end -2017, and stabilize around 5 percent in the 
medium term  after falling to 7 percent by the end of 2018.  
16. Following the July Inflation Report, the rise in commodity prices, particularly for oil 
and metals, and exchange rate changes drove inflation higher through the cost 
channel, causing core inflation indicators  to exceed forecasts. Inflation is expected 
to remain high in October and November before coming down markedly to a still 
elevated level in December amid base effects. Base effects from food  prices , the 
termination of temporary tax cuts for home appliances  and furniture in October and 
the methodology change for clothing are the factors that will cause inflation to 
fluctuate in the short term and core inflation to rise briefly. The inflation outlook is 
expected to improve gradually from December onwards.  
17. The current elevated levels of inflation and developments in core inflation indicators 
continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior. These risks and the high levels of 
inflation expectations might dampen the expected improvement in the inflation 
outlook from December through the first months of 2018. The fact that inflation 
expectations and the pricing behavior show no sign of improvement jeopardizes the 
inflation outlook. All these developments necessitate the maintaining of the tight 
monetary policy sta nce.  5 
 18. Against this background, the Committee decided to maintain the tight monetary 
policy stance in its October meeting and kept the Late Liquidity Window lending rate 
constant at 12.25 percent. The Committee strengthened gradually the caution level 
of its  monetary stance with the communication conducted in September and 
October.  
19. The tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained until the inflation outlook 
displays a significant improvement and becomes consistent with the targets. 
Accordingly, the mone tary policy will aim to bring inflation down to 7 percent at 
end-2018 before gradually falling to 5 percent. Consequently, with the current 
reading of the data, this stance requires that the tight monetary policy be preserved 
until a convincing fall in the  trend of inflation is reached. The CBRT formulates 
monetary policy by taking the medium -term inflation into account, thus focusing on 
the developments in underlying inflation rather than the anticipated fluctuations 
driven by the base effects during the c ourse of the year. Inflation expectations, 
pricing behaviors and other factors affecting inflation will be closely monitored and 
further monetary tightening will be delivered if needed.  The Committee will 
continue to use all available instruments in pursui t of the price stability objective.  
20. Developments in fiscal policy and tax adjustments are monitored closely with regard 
to their effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline monetary policy stance is 
formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline  will be maintained and there 
will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices and taxes. A revision of the 
monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate 
significantly from this framework, and consequently have an adverse effect on the 
medium -term inflation outlook.  
21. In recent years, sustaining fiscal discipline has been one of the key factors in 
lowering the sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external shocks. The room 
provided by fiscal discipline facilitated the im plementation of an expansionary fiscal 
policy. Structural measures to provide room for counter -cyclical fiscal policies will 
enhance the coordination of monetary and fiscal policy, and improve 
macroeconomic stability.  