No: 2017-47

PRESS RELEASE
21 December 2017

SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING
Meeting Date: 14 December 2017
Inflation Developments
1. In November, consumer prices rose by 1.49 percent and annual inflation increased
by 1.08 points to 12.98 percent. Annual inflation recorded some decline in the
services group, but increased in other subgroups. Food inflation increased due to
the unprocessed food group, while the core goods and energy groups witnessed the
adverse effects of exchange rate developments. Against these developments,
annual inflation in core indicators increased due to the core goods group, and the
underlying trend remained high.
2. In November, annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 3.04
points to 15.78 percent in November. The rise in annual inflation was largely driven
by unprocessed food prices, while processed food prices also continued to rise at
higher rates. Unlike the decline in meat prices, the negative outlook in the
vegetables group drove notably upwards the seasonally adjusted unprocessed food
prices. Meanwhile, the processed food group saw sustained price increases in
cheese and other dairy products. Leading indicators for December hint at a
downtrend in the annual food inflation to be led by unprocessed food prices. On the
energy front, prices soared further in November amid exchange rate developments
coupled with the prices of oil and other inputs.
3. Prices of services inched up by 0.11 percent in November and the annual services
inflation has declined for the first time since the start of the year to 9.42 percent.
Monthly price increases accelerated to some extent in rent, and remained mild in
other subgroups. This period was particularly marked by falling prices in transport
services as well as package tours under other services.
4. Annual core goods inflation increased by 0.74 points and reached 15.05 percent in
November. Annual inflation followed a flat course in the clothing group but
increased in other subgroups. Durable goods saw further monthly price hikes,
chiefly in automobiles, white goods and other electrical appliances. Meanwhile,
monthly price increases in core goods excluding clothing and durable goods gained
momentum. The recent hike in core goods inflation was mostly driven by exchange
1

rate developments and was also stimulated by the robust course of demand
conditions.
5. In sum, current elevated levels of inflation and the recent cost developments
continue to pose risks on expectations and the pricing behavior.
Factors Affecting Inflation
6. The GDP expanded by 11.1 percent in the third quarter of 2017 in annual terms, and
the quarterly growth became 1.2 percent. In addition to the course of economic
activity, this tremendous expansion in annual growth is also attributed to calendar
and base effects. The main driver of annual and quarterly growth proved to be
domestic demand led by machinery-equipment investments and private
consumption in the third quarter. The rebound in tourism and the robust course of
exports of goods notwithstanding, the sharp increase in gold imports limited the
contribution of net exports to annual growth in this period.
7. Recently released data indicate a strong economic activity. Industrial production in
October recorded an increase compared both to the previous month and the
average of the third quarter. Activity in sectors subject to tax incentives, chiefly the
furniture sector, displayed a slowdown, yet other sectors did not record a loss of
momentum. In fact, survey indicators hint at a sustained uptrend in industrial
production in the fourth quarter, albeit with some deceleration. Indicators for
services and trade stood moderate, while the recovery in the tourism sector spurs
economic activity further.
8. Domestic demand conditions keep improving. In the fourth quarter, private
consumption growth is expected to lose some pace following the withdrawal of tax
reductions in white goods and furniture. On the other hand, current indicators show
that the third-quarter improvement in machinery-equipment investments
continues.
9. The improving growth outlook across the globe, particularly for the EU, and Turkey’s
flexibility to shift markets abroad continue to stimulate exports. The rise in exports
of goods slows the deterioration in the current account deficit and improves the
core current account deficit indicators. In addition to the expected recovery in
tourism, the uptrend in exports of goods is envisaged to contribute further to the
balance. The Committee noted that the contribution of net exports to growth will
continue in the fourth quarter amid the strong course of exports.
10. The recovery in the labor market continued in the September period. Employment
increased in services, but receded in industry and construction compared to the
previous period. Survey data suggest that the labor market will improve further in
the last quarter. The Committee highlighted that employment gains failed to fully
pass through to unemployment rates due to the strong uptrend in the labor force
participation rate. Against this background, the unemployment rate is anticipated to
decline gradually in the period ahead.

2

11. In sum, economic activity recorded a robust growth in the third quarter. Recently
released data indicate that economic activity maintains its strength. Domestic
demand conditions keep improving and external demand continues to contribute
positively to exports.
Monetary Policy and Risks
12. Third-quarter data on global growth hint at continued simultaneous recovery in
both advanced and emerging economies. PMI indicators pointing to growth for both
markets and the upgraded growth forecasts for 2017 and 2018 compared to the
start of 2017 confirm the steady economic rebound across the globe. Global
inflation remains stable.
13. The primary downside risk to the global economic outlook over the upcoming period
is the geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and the Korean peninsula and the
heightened protectionism clouding international trade negotiations. Moreover, the
imminent passing of the US tax reform bill is considered a positive risk factor for the
world economy. Although oil prices that gained following the OPEC’s recent
extension of the output cut decision seem to be the main threat to the steady global
inflation, this upward tendency has been contained by the oil production increase in
the US.
14. With the Federal Reserve and the ECB in the lead, major central banks continue to
normalize monetary policy. As the steps towards normalization have been in line
with expectations, the market reaction is currently mild. However, risks to the US
interest rates are on the upside. The imminent tax reform fuels upbeat prospects for
the US stock market, yet if this bill leads to a bigger budget deficit, the US Treasury
bond rates might increase faster than expected.
15. The favorable global economic outlook and trade volume as well as the ongoing
global risk appetite drive strong portfolio flows into emerging economies. Having
lost some momentum after mid-September, portfolio investments to Turkey have
been picking up again recently amid reduced geopolitical risks. As the loans
guaranteed by the Credit Guarantee Fund hit the pre-determined upper limit, the
loan growth hovers around historical averages. The strong acceleration of loan
growth in the first half of the year and its phase-out in the second half are
monitored closely with regard to their impact on aggregate demand and economic
activity.
16. The third quarter’s economic activity and aggregate demand were mostly in line
with predictions. In the fourth quarter, domestic demand might see some slowdown
due to the reduced support of the additional credit boost to growth and the
withdrawal of tax incentives for durable goods, and economic growth is expected to
move towards its underlying trend. The continued recovery in tourism, the
improving global growth outlook and the favorable course of the real exchange rate
are expected to contribute further to growth and the current account balance in the
coming months through the export channel.
3

17. Against this background, uncertainties over monetary policies of major central
banks, the course of capital flows and geopolitical developments remain key to
economic activity. Exchange rate volatility that may arise from such factors poses a
downside risk to the timing and strength of the support that financial conditions
could provide to economic activity. In this regard, the contractionary pressure of the
recent Turkish lira depreciation on domestic demand might be partly offset by the
export channel.
18. The rise in commodity prices, particularly for oil and metals, and exchange rate
changes have recently driven inflation higher through the cost channel. Amid robust
economic activity, cost pressures had a much larger effect on inflation. Consumer
inflation is expected to come down markedly due to base effects but remain high in
December.
19. The current elevated levels of inflation and developments in core inflation indicators
continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior. These risks and the high levels of
inflation expectations might dampen the expected improvement in the inflation
outlook from December through the first months of 2018. The fact that inflation
expectations and the pricing behavior show no sign of improvement jeopardizes the
inflation outlook.
20. Accordingly, the Committee decided to tighten the monetary policy stance. First of
all, as of 22 November 2017, all CBRT funding have been made through the Late
Liquidity Window (LON) and the weighted average funding cost is raised by about 25
basis points to 12.25 percent. Moreover, at its December meeting, the Committee
decided to increase the LON lending rate from 12.25 to 12.75 percent.
21. The Central Bank will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price
stability objective. Tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained decisively until
inflation outlook displays a significant improvement and becomes consistent with
the targets. The CBRT formulates monetary policy by taking the medium-term
inflation into account, thus focusing on the developments in underlying inflation
rather than the anticipated fluctuations driven by the base effects during the course
of the year. Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors affecting
inflation will be closely monitored and, if needed, further monetary tightening will
be delivered.
22. Developments in fiscal policy and tax adjustments are monitored closely with regard
to their effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline monetary policy stance is
formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained and there
will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices and taxes. A revision of the
monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate
significantly from this framework, and consequently have an adverse effect on the
medium-term inflation outlook.
23. In recent years, sustaining fiscal discipline has been one of the key factors in
lowering the sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external shocks. The room
4

provided by fiscal discipline facilitated the implementation of an expansionary fiscal
policy. Structural measures to provide room for counter-cyclical fiscal policies will
enhance the coordination of monetary and fiscal policy, and improve
macroeconomic stability. Moreover, continuation of structural steps to reduce
inertia and volatility in inflation will contribute positively to the price stability
process and social welfare.

5

