1 
  
 
No: 2017 -36 
PRESS RELEASE  
21 September  2017  
SUMMARY OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING  
Meeting Date : 14 September 2017  
Inflation Developments  
1. In August, consumer prices were up 0.52 percent and annual inflation rose by 0.89 
points to 10.68 percent. Inflation recorded a spike in food and energy and remained 
elevated in services. Clothing and durable goods sent inflation soaring across core 
goods, pushing the annual inflation and the underlying trend of core indicators 
higher.  
2. Annual inflation  in food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 1.9 points to 11.97 
percent in August due to both a negative base effect from unprocessed food prices 
and widespread upsurges of processed food prices. Leading indicators for 
September signal that annual foo d inflation will remain on the rise mainly due to the 
base effect from unprocessed food. Energy prices jumped by 2.03 percent in August 
amid price developments in oil and other inputs. Thus, having been on an upward 
track for the last two months, annual en ergy inflation amounted to 10.54 percent.  
3. Prices of services rose by 0.73 percent while annual services inflation remained high 
at a virtually unchanged 9.40 percent in August. In this period, inflation was higher 
across catering and accommodation services  due to rising food and beverage prices 
as well as the recovering tourism. Other drivers of high services inflation include 
soaring costs and indexation to headline inflation. In fact, prices of educational 
services, which are largely inflation -indexed, su rged by 2.79 percent, driving annual 
inflation up to 10.30 percent in this subcategory.  
4. Annual core goods inflation increased by 1.22 points to 11.08 percent in August. 
Clothing and durable goods prices drove annual inflation higher amid the Turkish 
lira’s  slide against the euro and the strong economic activity. With the methodology 
change for clothing factored in as well, inflation seems to be on the rise for the last 
two months. Among durable goods, price hikes were more prevalent in furniture, 
automobile s and home appliances, yet monthly price increases continued to slow 
across core goods excluding clothing and durable goods. Indicators for September 
hint at continued uptrend in core goods inflation, albeit mainly due to the 
methodology change in the weig ht system for the clothing category.  
2 
 5. In sum, current elevated levels of inflation and developments in core inflation 
indicators pose risks to the pricing behavior.  
Factor s Affecting I nflation 
6. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew annually 5.1 percent and quarterly 2.1 percent 
in the second quarter of 2017. Economic activity was thus stronger than in the first 
quarter. The upward revisions to the data of previous periods were also considered 
as signs of an even stronger economic activity leading to the conc lusion that the 
disinflationary contribution of demand conditions has reduced significantly as of the 
second quarter. The main driver of quarterly growth in this period was domestic 
demand, particularly construction investments and private consumption. Net  
exports made a negative contribution to quarterly growth due to the domestic 
demand -led upswing in imports and weaker exports, yet continued to boost annual 
growth.  
7. Leading indicators suggest that economic activity remained robust in the third 
quarter. Ju ly’s industrial production data and the PMI data for August signal 
stronger growth in the third quarter compared to the previous one. Not only the 
manufacturing industry, but also services, retail trade and construction saw 
strengthening activity recently.  Accordingly, economic recovery appears to be more 
widespread across sectors.  
8. A similar outlook is also evident in demand indicators. The consumer demand for 
categories subject to incentives remains robust while investments edged up in the 
second quarter a fter a subdued first quarter. Domestic demand is likely to make 
more contribution to growth in the third quarter. Given the strengthening economy 
as well as the calendar and base effects, the Committee expects a sizable annual 
growth for the third quarter.  
9. Domestic demand keeps recovering while net external demand spurs growth thanks 
to increases in exports of goods that spill over into a wide range of sectors. The 
improving growth outlook across the globe, particularly for the EU and Turkey’s 
flexibility t o shift markets abroad continue to stimulate exports. Increases in exports 
of goods slow down the deterioration of the current account deficit and help 
improve core current account deficit indicators. In addition to the expected partial 
recovery in tourism , the uptrend in exports of goods is envisaged to contribute 
further to the current account balance.  
10. The uptick in the labor market, which started in February and March, continued in 
June period. In this period, nonfarm employment was up on account of serv ices. 
Leading indicators signal further gradual decreases in unemployment rates over the 
upcoming period amid economic recovery.  
11. In short, recently released data indicate that the recovery in economic activity has 
gained strength. Domestic demand condition s keep improving and demand from the 
European Union economies continues to contribute positively to exports. The 3 
 Committee assesses that the implementation of the structural reforms would 
contribute to potential growth significantly.  
Monetary Policy and Ri sks 
12. Global economic activity has recently settled on a trend of recovery due both to 
advanced and emerging economies. The optimistic outlook in the consumer and the 
real sector confidence indices, ongoing favorable conditions in global financing and 
stabilizing commodity prices also underpin the positive outlook in global economic 
activity. Leading indicators for the third quarter hint at a better growth performance 
than the second quarter, which lead to upward revisions in the year -end growth 
project ions for 2017. While communications by advanced economy central banks 
regarding the normalization of monetary policies occasionally cause short -term 
market volatility, the monetary policy normalization process has remained 
moderate because of still low glo bal inflation rates. The elevated risk appetite and 
the subsided volatility in global financial markets along with favorable figures 
regarding global growth, keep portfolio inflows to emerging economies brisk 
including Turkey.  
13. Despite the current favorable  outlook in global economic activity, downside risks to 
global economy reside as well. In particular, should the normalization process of the 
Fed’s policy -rate increase and the balance sheet downsizing prove faster than 
expected, the high risk appetite and  low volatility cycle in financial markets may 
reverse. That may generate fluctuations in prices of securities in advanced 
economies and weaken the growth trend. Moreover, fading risk appetite also led by 
geopolitical developments may cause fluctuations in  portfolio flows to emerging 
economies as well.  
14. In line with the upbeat mood in global financial markets, domestic financial 
conditions also continued to be supportive of economic activity in the third quarter. 
This was driven by macroprudential policies, public measures and incentives, as well 
as the credits secured by the Credit Guarantee Fund (CGF), which improved overall 
credit conditions. As the upper limit defined in credits secured by the CGF becomes 
near and the supply -side effects have recently ste pped in the banking sector, credit 
growth is balancing at milder levels, approaching past averages in the third quarter. 
The strong acceleration in credits in the first half of the year is monitored closely 
with regard to the extent of its impact on the ag gregate demand and economic 
activity.  
15. Recently -released indicators confirm the previous view that downside risks to 
economic activity have abated and the economic recovery will prove more robust 
starting from the second quarter of the year. Third -quarter i ndicators reveal an 
ongoing robust economic activity. Exports remain buoyant despite some 
deceleration, and investments signal for recovery on the back of the sustained 
improvement in domestic demand. Annual growth in the third quarter is likely to 
prove q uite high due to the calendar and base effects. The remainder of the year is 4 
 anticipated to witness a milder trend in economic activity due to the fading effects 
of the CGF support on growth and the withdrawal of the tax incentives on 
consumption expenditu res. 
16. Assessing the data on economic activity and the labor market jointly suggests a 
subsided disinflationary support from demand conditions in some sectors. Base 
effects in the food group, temporary tax reductions in white goods and the furniture 
sector t hat will be taken back in October as well as the methodological changes 
stand out as factors that will lead to fluctuations in inflation in the short term and 
temporary increases in core inflation. The inflation outlook is projected to improve 
gradually st arting from the last months of the year, yet the pace and quality of this 
improvement will be monitored closely.  
17. Against this background, the Committee decided to maintain the tight stance of 
monetary policy in its September meeting and kept the Late Liqui dity Window 
lending rate constant at 12.25 percent. The CBRT will continue to use all available 
instruments in pursuit of the price stability objective. Tight stance in monetary 
policy will be maintained until inflation outlook displays a significant impro vement. 
The CBRT formulates monetary policy by taking the medium -term inflation into 
account, thus focusing on the developments in underlying inflation rather than the 
anticipated fluctuations driven by the base effects during the course of the year. 
Infla tion expectations, pricing behavior and other factors affecting inflation will be 
closely monitored and further monetary tightening will be delivered if needed.  
18. Developments in fiscal policy and tax adjustments are monitored closely with regard 
to their ef fects on the inflation outlook. The baseline monetary policy stance for the 
upcoming period is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be 
maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices and 
taxes. A revision o f the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal 
policy deviate significantly from this framework, and consequently have an adverse 
effect on the medium -term inflation outlook.  
19. In recent years, sustained fiscal discipline has been one of k ey factors in lowering 
the sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external shocks. The room provided 
by fiscal discipline facilitated the implementation of expansionary fiscal policy. 
Structural measures to provide room for counter -cyclical fiscal poli cies will enhance 
the coordination of monetary and fiscal policy, and improve macroeconomic 
stability.  