 
1  
Summary of the Monetary Policy 
Committee Meeting  
25 January 2018, No: 201 8-02 
Meeting Date: 18 January 2018  
 
Inflation Developments  
1. In December, consumer prices rose by 0.69 percent,  and annual inflation dropped by 1.06 
points to 11.92 percent. Annual inflation recorded a decline in food and energy groups, but 
increased in the core goods group. The fall in food inflation was led by the unprocessed 
group, while core goods group was lar gely affected by the cumulative depreciati on in the 
Turkish lira . Against these developments, annual inflation in core indicators increased  slightly 
and their underlying trend remained high.  
2. In December, annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages receded by 1.99 points to 
13.79 percent. This fall was largely driven by unprocessed food prices due to the base effect 
accompanied by the sustained decline in red meat prices. Meanwhile, having soared lately, 
processed food prices rose moderately in Decem ber. The surge in prices of cheese and other 
dairy products in recent months turned flat due to the muted rise in raw milk prices. In line 
with red meat prices, processed meat products recorded a decline. Owing to the change in 
the basis weight in the Brea d Communique, processed food prices entail the risk of an 
upsurge in January. Nevertheless, leading indicators for January hint at a downtrend in the 
annual food inflation to be led by the unprocessed food group.  
3. The uptrend in international oil prices wei gh on energy prices. Accordingly, energy prices 
registered an increase in December, yet the group’s annual inflation declined due to the base 
effect. Despite the increase in electricity prices, leading indicators hint at a similar decline in 
energy inflati on due to the base effect in January as well.  
4. Prices of services inched up by 0.43 percent in December and the annual services inflation 
remained almost unchanged at 9.47 percent. In this period annual inflation increased in 
transport services; remained re latively flat in the restaurants -hotels and communications 
group, but decreased in other groups. Fuel prices, which surged amid the depreciated 
Turkish lira coupled with the rise in oil prices, aggravate inflation in transport services. 
Meanwhile, the robu st course of demand conditions in certain groups and the headline -
inflation indexation stiffens the elevated levels in services inflation.  
5. Annual core goods inflation crept up by 0.40 points and reached 15.45 percent in December. 
This was led by the prices  of durable goods that increased parallel to the soaring prices of 
automobiles and white goods. Thus, inflation in durable goods reached 18 percent. Price 
increases in other core goods accelerated in tandem with the cumulative exchange rate 
effects in prod ucts with high import component. The effect of the methodological change in 
the clothing group continued with a weaker pace. The rebound in manufacturing in the 
 
2 clothing sector coupled with the improvement in tourism fueled the rise in group’s inflation 
across the year.  
6. In sum, current elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks 
on the pricing behavior.  
Factors Affecting Inflation  
7. Recently -released data indicate that economic activity maintains its strength. A joint analys is 
of October and November data suggests sustained growth in industrial production with some 
deceleration in the fourth quarter. However, this deceleration stems from the slowing 
activity in sectors subject to tax incentives, particularly furniture, and ot her sectors do not 
register a loss of momentum. Survey indicators show that this trend is maintained in 
December as well. Indicators for services and trade stand moderate, while the recovery in 
the tourism sector spurs economic activity further.  
8. Domestic d emand continues to expand. In the fourth quarter, private consumption growth is 
expected to lose some pace following the withdrawal of tax reductions in white goods and 
furniture. On the other hand, current indicators show that the third -quarter improvemen t in 
machinery -equipment investments continues.  
9. The improving growth outlook across the globe, particularly in the EU, rising external demand 
and Turkey’s flexibility to shift markets abroad continue to stimulate exports. The 
improvement in the import demand in tandem with the course of economic activity 
notwithstanding, the rise in exports of goods slows the deterioration in the core current 
account deficit indicators. In addition to the ongoing recovery in tourism, the uptrend in 
exports of goods is e nvisaged to contribute further to the current account balance. The 
Committee noted that the contribution of net exports to quarterly GDP growth will continue 
in the fourth quarter owing to the strong course of exports accompanied by the slowing gold 
import s. 
10. The second and third -quarter recovery in the labor market continued in the October period, 
confirming that economic activity remains robust. Employment increased in services and 
industry, but receded in the construction sector compared to the previous p eriod. Survey 
data suggest the rise in employment coupled with the fall in unemployment rates will 
continue. The Committee highlighted that employment gains failed to fully pass through to 
unemployment rates due to the strong uptrend in the labor force par ticipation rate. Against 
this background, the unemployment rate is anticipated to decline gradually in the period 
ahead.  
11. In sum, recently released data indicate that economic activity maintains its strength. 
Domestic demand continues to expand and external  demand contributes positively to 
exports.  
Monetary Policy and Risks  
12. Data on global growth hint at continued simultaneous recovery in both advanced and 
emerging economies. PMI indicators pointing to growth for both markets and the upgraded 
growth forecasts , particularly for the euro area, confirm the steady economic rebound across 
the globe. Global inflation has been volatile amid changing commodity and oil prices yet 
remains low, whereas global core inflation remains stable.  
13. The primary downside risks to t he global economic outlook over the upcoming period are the 
geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and the Korean peninsula and the heightened  
3 protectionism clouding international trade negotiations. Moreover, the US tax reform is 
considered a positive r isk factor for the world economy.  
14. With the Federal Reserve and the ECB in the lead, major central banks continue to normalize 
monetary policy. As the steps towards normalization have been in line with expectations, the 
market reaction is currently mild. Ho wever, risks to monetary policy tightening are more on 
the upside. With the ongoing economic recovery in the US, the Fed demonstrated its 
commitment to policy normalization. The strengthening euro area economy increases the 
possibility of an earlier -than -anticipated tightening of the ECB monetary policy. Despite the 
favorable course of the labor market in advanced countries, the limited increase in wages, 
while limiting price increases, poses an upward risk in terms of inflation in the upcoming 
period. Anot her key factor that might deteriorate the stable global inflation is the recent 
movements in oil prices.  
15. The favorable global economic outlook and trade volume as well as the ongoing global risk 
appetite drive strong portfolio flows into emerging economies . In 2018, it is estimated that 
portfolio inflows will continue in the case of sustained economic recovery and a moderate 
course in monetary policy normali zation of advanced economies. Meanwhile, portfolio 
investments to Turkey may at times be volatile amid geopolitical risks.  
16. Both global and domestic financial conditions have generally been supportive of economic 
activity. Since the December MPC meeting, financial indicators such as exchange rate 
volatility, market interest rates and risk premium have a lleviated thanks to the CBRT policies 
and the interruption in the negative news flow. Due to the CBRT’s tighter monetary stance, 
the downward slope of the yield curve has become more pronounced. The loan growth that 
hovers around historical averages as the  loans guaranteed by the Credit Guarantee Fund hit 
the pre -determined upper limit in mid -2017 is monitored closely with regard to its impact on 
aggregate demand and economic activity.  
17. Domestic demand has slowed slightly due to the reduced support of the ad ditional credit 
boost to growth and the withdrawal of tax incentives for durable goods, and economic 
growth has started to move towards its underlying trend as of the fourth quarter of 2017. 
The accommodative policies of 2017 will have less of an effect in  2018 while the fiscal 
measures to be introduced within the context of the Medium Term Program and the tight 
monetary stance are expected to be the main drivers of loan growth and a normalized 
economic activity. Moreover, the smaller yet ongoing Credit Gua rantee Fund support will 
support domestic demand in 2018. The steady recovery in tourism, the improving global 
growth outlook and the favorable course of the real exchange rate are expected to 
contribute further to growth and the current account balance in  the coming months through 
the export channel. Against this background, uncertainties over monetary policies of major 
central banks, the course of capital flows and geopolitical developments remain key to 
economic activity. Exchange rate volatility that ma y arise from such factors poses a downside 
risk to the timing and strength of the support that financial conditions could provide to 
economic activity.  
18. Current elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks on the 
pricing be havior. Having pulled annual consumer inflation down in December largely on the 
back of base effects and weather conditions, food and energy prices might shape consumer 
prices over the first quarter of 2018, particularly due to upward and downward volatili ty in 
unprocessed food prices. In addition, changes in oil prices put upward pressure on domestic 
energy prices. Meanwhile, core goods inflation remains on the rise amid cumulative 
exchange rate effects, and aggregate demand conditions support this uptrend . Given also the  
4 elevated services inflation, the Committee assesses that there is no significant improvement 
in the core inflation outlook.  
19. Accordingly, the Committee decided to maintain the tight monetary policy stance and kept 
the Late Liquidity Window (LON) lending rate at 12.75 percent. The CBRT will continue to use 
all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability objective. The tight stance in 
monetary policy will be maintained decisively until the inflation outlook displays a significant 
improvement, independent of base effects and temporary factors, and becomes consistent 
with the targets. The Committee formulates monetary policy by taking the medium -term 
inflation into account, thus focusing on the developments in underlying inflation rat her than 
the anticipated fluctuations driven by the base effects during the course of the year. Inflation 
expectations, the pricing behavior and other factors affecting inflation will be closely 
monitored, and, if needed, further monetary tightening will b e delivered.  
20. Developments in fiscal policy and tax adjustments are monitored closely with regard to their 
effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline monetary policy stance is formulated under the 
assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained and  there will be no unanticipated hikes 
in administered prices and taxes. A revision of the monetary policy stance may be considered, 
should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from this framework, and consequently have an 
adverse effect on the medium -term inflation outlook.  
21. In recent years, sustaining fiscal discipline has been one of the key factors in lowering the 
sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external shocks. The room provided by fiscal 
discipline facilitated the implementation of an expa nsionary fiscal policy. Structural measures 
to provide room for counter -cyclical fiscal policies will enhance the coordination of monetary 
and fiscal policy, and improve macroeconomic stability. Moreover, continuation of structural 
steps to reduce inertia and volatility in inflation will contribute positively to the price stability 
process and social welfare.  