 
1  
Summary of the Monetary Policy 
Committee Meeting  
30 May 2018, No: 201 8-22 
Meeting Date:  23 May  2018  
Globa l Developments  
1. In consideration  of recent developments, the Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) 
reviewed the risk scenarios discussed  in the meeting on 25 April 2018 as well as the Inflation 
Report.  
2. Financial conditions have recently tightened in advanced economies. The probability o f an 
accelerat ed inflation due to brisk demand conditions and rising commodity prices  constitutes 
a risk of trigger ing a faster -than -projected tight ening in monetary policies of these countries.  
The Federal Reserve (the Fed) is more likely to implement three more policy rate hikes  in the 
remainder of 2018,  and the US bond returns have increased. Led also by the appreciation 
trend in the USD, global financial markets have witnessed fluctuations , the risk sentiment for 
emerging economies have deteriorated, exchange rates saw depreciation and increased 
volatility and portfolio flows lost momentum.  
3. Fluctuating global financial markets have a tightening effect on domestic financial conditions. 
Due to geopolitical developments accompanied by prospects for macro indicators such as 
inflation and the current account deficit, Turkey grew more sensitive against global 
fluctuations. Due to h igher risk premium and lower portfolio flows , the depreciation and 
volatility in the Turkish lira was higher compared to the currencies  of other emerging 
economies. The depreciation trend in the Turkish lira ha s gained pace since the third week of 
May and signal ed for unhealthy price formations inconsistent with economic fun damentals.  
4. Accordingly, considering the effects of unhealthy price formations and excessive volatilities in 
the markets on the inflation outlook , the Central Bank has introduced some adjustments for 
the foreign exchange market since the meeting on 25 April. These adjustments aim at 
controlled and eff icient provi sion of th e liquidity required by  the market in times of excessive 
volatility.  
Market Measures  
5. It was  announced on 7 May 2018  that the upper limit for the foreign exchange  maintenance 
facility within the reserve options mechanism was lowered from 55 percent to 45 percent , 
and tranches were re -adjust ed. Through th is revision, banks were provided with foreign 
exchange liquidity and Turkish lira  liquidity conditions were tightened . 
6. With an  announcement on 9 May 2018, t he daily amount of Foreign Exchange Deposits 
against Turkish Lira Deposits auctions was raised from 1. 25 billi on USD to 1.5 billion US D. 
Accordingly, the maximum total outstanding deposit amount in the  auctions of 6.25 billion 
USD was enabled to amount to  7.5 billion USD.  Through the same announcement , the 
 
2 calendar for Turkish lira -settled forward foreign exchange sale auctions to be held i n the 
second quarter of 2018 was updated. Accordingly, the amount of forward foreign exchange 
sale position was increase d to 7. 1 billion USD .  
Macroeconomic Outlook and the Policy Rate  
7. In the previous meeting, the Committee viewed the case in which cost-push inflationary 
pressures on the Turkish economy are accompanied by portfolio outflows as a risk scenario, 
and stated that  the extent of the pass -through from rising exchange rates to consumer prices 
and the potential impact on overall financial sta bility will shape the monetary policy 
response.      
8. Consumer prices rose by 1.87 percent in April, and annual inflation increased by 0.62 points 
to 10.85 percent. The rise in inflation was mostly due to oil prices and exchange rate -driven 
increases in pri ces of energy and core goods. Annual inflation rates and underlying trends of 
core indicators went up due to developments in core goods. Annual food inflation declined 
on the back of unprocessed food prices whereas annual inflation in indices B and C incre ased 
by 0.59 and 0.80 points to 12.54 and 12.24 percent, respectively. Producer -driven cost 
pressures were stronger than in the previous month while demand conditions caused cost 
shocks to have a more significant effect on inflation.  
9. High inflation and ri sing inflation expectations keep risks to pricing behavior alive. According 
to diffusion indices, economic agents are much more inclined to raise prices. The inertia in 
the indicators for underlying inflation trends and the high levels of core inflation co ntinue to 
pose risks to pricing behavior. In addition, the recent increases in import prices, particularly 
for oil, add to these risks.  
10. After a robust first quarter, economic activity has begun to converge to its underlying trend 
as of the second quarter o f 2018. Although aggregate demand conditions are likely to have a 
steadily waning effect on inflation, the cost pressures from the recent Turkish lira 
depreciation and their potential second -round effects weigh on the inflation outlook.  
11. In sum, the recent  unhealthy price formations in the markets and the ongoing increase in 
inflation expectations continue to pose risks to pricing behavior . Against this background,  the 
Committee decided to implement a strong monetary tightening to support price stability.  
Accordingly, the Late Liquidity Window lending rate was raised from 13.5 to 16.5 percent.  
12. At the meeting, the Committee also agreed to simplify the operational framework shortly in 
order to enhance the predictability of monetary policy and strengthen the tr ansmission 
mechanism.  
13. The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability 
objective. The tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained decisively until the inflation 
outlook displays a significant improvement and becomes consistent with the targets . Inflation 
expectations, pricing behavior and other factors affecting inflation will be closely monitored,  
and, if needed, further monetary tightening will be delivered.  
 
 