Summary of the Monetary Policy
Committee Meeting
20 December 2018, No: 2018-49
Meeting Date: 13 December 2018

Inflation Developments
1.

In November, consumer prices dropped by 1.44% and annual inflation decreased by 3.62
points to 21.62%. Annual inflation registered a decline across all subcategories. The fall in
core goods inflation was mainly led by temporary tax cuts applied to durable goods. In this
period, energy prices dropped due to the fall in oil prices and the appreciation in the Turkish
lira. Against this background, annual inflation and the underlying trend in core indicators
both decelerated. In sum, consumer prices in November reflect tax cuts, the appreciation in
the Turkish lira, and falling oil prices as well as demand-side effects led by weaker economic
activity.

2.

Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages went down by 3.60 points to 25.66% in
November. This decline was mostly driven by the fall in unprocessed food prices led by fresh
fruits and vegetables. On the processed food front, after following a high course for a while,
price increases lost pace in this period.

3.

Energy prices were down by 0.71% and annual inflation in this group fell by 4.08 points to
25.35%. This is attributed to falling international oil prices and the appreciation in Turkish
lira. Leading indicators for December indicate that the support from fuel prices to consumer
inflation continues at a strong pace.

4.

Annual core goods inflation fell by 7.46 points to 26.89% in November owing mainly to the
prices of durable goods that dropped on the back of temporary tax cuts and the high
reflections of these discounts on prices in past months. The rate of increase in clothing prices
remained significantly below periodic price increases of past years. Meanwhile, lagged
effects of the exchange rate on other core goods persisted, albeit in a weaker manner. All in
all, the decline in core goods inflation in November is largely attributed to temporary tax
cuts, while appreciation in the Turkish lira and weaker domestic demand emerged as other
factors to support the slowdown in inflation.

5.

The annual services inflation fell by 0.09 points to 14.67%. Annual inflation declined in rents
and transport services, but remained almost flat in communication, restaurants-hotels and
other services groups. Cost-side factors led by food and fuel prices had a positive effect on
the catering and transportation services inflation. Meanwhile, weakening domestic demand
supported the overall slowdown in services inflation.

1

Factors Affecting Inflation
6.

In the third quarter, Turkey’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) contracted by 1.1% quarter-onquarter but grew by 1.6% at an annual basis. The economic slowdown was driven by
domestic demand, with both consumption and investment expenditures down from the
previous quarter. Public consumption was another drag on quarterly growth. As a result of
the domestic demand-led sharp drop in imports coupled with robust exports of goods and
strong tourism demand, net exports made an increased contribution to quarterly and annual
growth and prevented the economy from contracting further.

7.

Recently released data show that the rebalancing trend in the economy has become more
noticeable. Economic activity continues to slow amid weaker domestic demand. In addition,
with the rapid rise in inflation, real incomes fall and weigh on domestic demand. The outlook
for export and tourism-related activities remains relatively stable, but employment and
investment weaken across sectors.

8.

Despite recent signs of some slowdown in global growth, external demand maintains its
strength. Firms’ orientation towards external markets amid sluggish domestic demand and
their flexibility in market diversification stimulate exports of goods; and external balances
continue to improve rapidly on brisk tourism demand. On the other hand, imports remain on
a downward slide, largely due to consumption and investment goods, which led to
historically high current account surplus in August – October period. The rapid improvement
in current account balance is expected to continue in the period ahead. Accordingly, net
exports are expected to contribute further to growth in the fourth quarter and limit the
economic slowdown to some extent. The Committee noted that exports of goods and
services will continue to spur growth in the coming months and the falling import demand
reflecting weak domestic demand will continue to have a positive effect on the current
account balance.

9.

Labor market data confirm that the economy continues to slow on the back of domestic
demand. In the third quarter, construction employment declined while the public sector and
business activities across services and industrial sectors with relatively stronger external
trade links continued to make a positive contribution to employment.

Monetary Policy and Risks
10. Global economic activity remained positive from the perspective of external demand, yet
decelerated slightly. Increasing protectionist trends in foreign trade increased the
uncertainty over global economic policies and highlighted downside risks to the global
growth outlook for the upcoming period. The slowdown in the global economic activity was
mostly driven by advanced economies, led by the euro area. Forecasts for 2019 also point
that the global growth outlook weakened slightly compared to the previous period, mainly
due to the weak foreign trade. Additionally, developments related to the Brexit keep
uncertainties over both the economic activity and financial markets in the euro area alive.
11. Despite the weakening global economic activity, global inflation has risen due to both
advanced and emerging economies. This rise is mainly attributable to energy prices led by oil
prices, which generally hovered at high levels throughout the first three quarters of 2018. In
the recent period, oil prices have decreased notably driven by both supply and demand
factors. This decline is expected to exert downward pressure on the inflation of both
advanced and emerging economies. On the wages front, the unemployment rates, which are

2

at historically low levels in some advanced economies, remain to be a wages driven upside
risk factor for global inflation.
12. The normalization expectations regarding the monetary policy of advanced economies is
more moderate compared to the previous period, mainly due to the relative weakening of
global growth outlook and the decline in oil prices. Although this outlook implies more
favorable conditions in terms of portfolio flows to emerging economies, increased
uncertainties over global economic policies may affect risk appetite adversely, thereby posing
downside risks to portfolio flows.
13. While developments in import prices and domestic demand conditions have led to some
improvement in the inflation outlook, risks to price stability continue to prevail. Elevated
levels of inflation and inflation expectations, and uncertainties over the course of cost factors
continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior in the coming period. Accordingly, the
Committee has decided to maintain the tight monetary policy stance until the inflation
outlook displays a significant improvement and kept the policy rate (one week repo auction
rate) constant at 24%.
14. The Central Bank will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability
objective. Inflation expectations, pricing behavior, lagged impact of recent monetary policy
decisions, contribution of fiscal policy to the rebalancing process, and other factors affecting
inflation will be closely monitored and if needed, further monetary tightening will be
delivered.
15. The fiscal policy outlook that the monetary policy is based on incorporates a policy stance
that focuses on price stability and macroeconomic rebalancing and that is coordinated with
the monetary policy. Accordingly, the monetary policy stance assumes that administered
price, tax and wage adjustments are formulated in a way that will help reducing the
backward indexation behavior. If the fiscal policy significantly deviates from this framework
leading to an adverse impact on the medium-term inflation outlook, the monetary policy
stance may be revised.
16. Collective efforts to turn the recently enhanced coordination between monetary and fiscal
policies into a sustained and systematic structure are expected to support the achievement
of price stability. Moreover, continued structural steps focusing on reducing rigidity and
volatility in inflation will contribute to price stability and therefore social welfare.

3

