 
1  
Summary of the Monetary Policy 
Committee Meeting  
 
20 September 2018, No:  2018 -41 
Meeting Date: 13 September 2018  
Inflation Developments  
1. In August, consumer prices rose by 2.30 percent and annual inflation increased by 2.05 
points to 17.90 percent. The rise in annual inflation was widespread across subcategories, 
with the most significant contribution coming from core goods and energy group s due to 
exchange rate developments. In the recent period , cost pressures have elevated , economic 
units’ tendency to raise prices has become stronger.  
2. Annual inflation in food and non -alcoholic beverages rose by 0.35 points to 19.75 percent in 
August. In this period,  seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices remained almost flat. 
Meanwhile, processed food prices increased by 2.12 percent in August, mainly due to 
exchange rates and developments in the prices of products used as input for processed food.  
3. In August, energy prices increased by 5.37 percent and annual inflation in this group 
increased by 3.85 points to 21.34 percent. The rise was mainly driven by increments in 
electricity and natural gas prices as well as increased fuel oil prices due to Spec ial 
Consumption Tax (SCT) arrangements.  
4. Annual core goods inflation rose by 3.60 points to 23.18 percent in August. The durable 
goods and other core goods prices continued to increase across subcategories due to 
exchange rate developments. Prices of durab le consumption goods increased by 5.49 
percent. The seasonal sales in clothing group remained limited compared to previous years.   
5. Annual services inflation increased by 0.80 points to 11.84 percent.  Transportation services 
inflation went up on the back o f rapid rises in tourism and fuel -oil prices. Meanwhile, the 
uptrend in accommodation services continued due to exchange rate developments and 
robust tourism activities.  
Factors Affecting Inflation  
6. In the second quarter of 2018, Gross Domestic Product (GD P) increased by 0.9 percent 
quarterly and by 5.2 percent annually. Thus, economic activity slowed down to converge to 
its underlying trend and rebalanced in terms of its composition. In the second quarter, the 
main driver of the quarterly growth was net ex ports backed by the recovery in tourism.   
7. Recently released data indicate a more significant rebalancing trend in the economic activity.  
According to the third quarter data, external demand maintains its strength . Amid a stable 
global growth outlook, risi ng external demand and flexibility in diversifying export markets 
continue to stimulate exports. The Committee noted that the recovery in revenues from 
 
2 tourism and other services is rather strong, and under these circumstances, the positive 
contribution of  net exports to quarterly growth may increase also in the third quarter. In the 
upcoming period, exports of goods and services are expected to boost growth further and 
the slowdown in import demand resulting from the subdued domestic demand is likely to 
maintain its positive impact on the current account balance.  
Monetary Policy and Risks  
8. Data on global economy indicate that growth has stabilized and remained strong,  offering a  
positive outlook for the  year end. Despite the rise in commodity and energy prices due to 
positive global growth, consumer and core inflation rates continue to follow a moderate 
course worldwide . Downside risks to the global g rowth outlook  are assessed  to be more 
evident in the upcoming period. Geopolitical developments and increa sed discourse of 
protectionism  in foreign trade stand out as the main risk factors that may deteriorate  the 
global growth outlook.   
9. An assessment of global inflation risks reveals that geopolitical developments and 
uncertainties about foreign trade polici es may pose an upward risk to commodity prices, 
particularly energy and metal prices. Moreover, the likelihood of an acceleration in wages in 
advanced economies due to falling unemployment rates is also one of the most important 
risk factors for inflation  in these countries .  
10. Financial conditions in advanced economies have tightened in the recent period.  The 
probability of acceleration  in inflation due to strong demand and the rise in commodity 
prices creates a risk that may trigger a faster -than -expected t ightening in the monetary 
policies of these economies. In particular, the ongoing positive growth performance and the 
new tax law in the US that can be seen as an expansionary fiscal policy increases the 
probability of Fed to expedite the monetary policy normalization process.  
11. In sum, g eopolitical uncertainties, weakening capital flows to wards  emerging economies, and 
the expansion of protectionism discourse in foreign trade continue to affect  the outlook in 
emerging eco nomies.  
12. In this period  of high volatility in financial markets, cost pressures and their second -round 
effects have negatively affect ed the inflation outlook.  Accordingly, the Committee has 
delivered a strong monetary tightening  in September to support pric e stability and raised the 
policy rate (the one -week repo auction rate) to 24 percent from 17.75 percent.  It has also 
announced that the Central Bank funding, which used to be provided through overnight 
lending, will be provided via one -week repo auctions.     
13. The Central Bank will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability 
objective. The tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained decisively until the inflation 
outlook displays a significant improvement. Inflation exp ectations, pricing behavior, lagged 
impact of recent monetary policy decisions, contribution of fiscal policy to the rebalancing 
process, and other factors affecting inflation will be closely monitored and, if needed, further 
monetary tightening will be de livered.  
14. The enhanced coordination between monetary policy and fiscal policy is believed to play an 
important role in disinflation efforts and macroeconomic rebalancing. Moreover, continued 
structural steps focusing on reducing rigidity and volatility in inflation will contribute to price 
stability and social welfare.  
 
 