 
1  
Summary of the Monetary Policy 
Committee Meeting  
14 June  2018, Sayı: 201 8-24 
Meeting Date:  7 June  2018  
Inflation Developments  
1. In Ma y, consumer prices rose by 1.62 percent and annual inflation increased by 1.30 points 
to 12. 15 percent. The uptick in inflation spread across subgroups in this period. Persisting 
producer -price -driven cost pressures proved stronger relative to April. All in all, core 
indicators witnesse d an increase in annual inflation , and their underlying trend maintained a 
high course . 
2. Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages w ent up by 2.19 points to 11.00 percent 
in Ma y. The uptick in the annual food inflation was led by the unprocessed food group, while 
the annual processed food inflation remained on a downward track . Seasonally adjusted 
unprocessed food prices recorded a notable increase, with items such as vegetables, potato, 
white and red meat and eggs in the lead. Price increases in processed food , which proved 
high across the first quarter, decelerat ed further in May as in April, and the group’s annual 
inflation receded to 13.42 percent.  
3. Energy prices increased by 1.74 percent in Ma y and annual energy inflation rose by 3.18 
points to 15.17 percent,  largely due to the low base effect accompanied by exchange rate 
developments  and the course of oil prices. Owing to the tax arrangement in fuel products 
(re-arrangement of lump -sum special consumption tax amounts according to the changes in  
dom estic refinery outlet prices due to the international oil prices or the exchange rate), it is 
expected that price increases in the energy group will lose pace, but the group’s annual 
inflation will remain on the rise  in June . 
4. In May, p rices of services rose  by 1.17 percent and a nnual services inflation inched up by 
0.25 points to 9. 52 percent , mostly due the to transport and restaurants- hotels groups. 
Inflation in transport services was pushed up  by highway passenger transport, while th e 
restaurants- hotels group saw rising prices in catering and accommodation services. These 
groups also reflected cost pr essures led by the exchange rate  as well as  oil and food prices in 
addition to demand- side effects driven by the upbeat performance in t ourism.  
5. Annual core goods inflation rose  by 0.52 point s to 15.98 percent. Annual inflation declined 
somewhat  in the clothing group, but picked up in other subgroup s. The persisting upsurge in 
prices of durable goods continued in May, which was led by the prices of automobiles and 
white goods. In the other core goods group , prices posted increases due to the  items with 
large import content such as housing maintenance and repair equipment  and do mestic 
cleaning products. In sum, cumulative deprecat ion in the Turkish lira stood out as the  main 
driver of the rise in the core goods inflation in May.  
 
2 6. The base effect and cost factors are lik ely to continue to exert upward pressure on annual 
inflation  in June. Moreover, leading indicators signal that some  subcategories of the 
unprocessed food group may register price hikes well above seasonal averages. Considered 
mostly temporary, this movement is monitored closely.  
7. As a result, cost factors are the main driver of the upsurge in inflation. On the other hand, 
price increases marked a generalized pattern across subsectors. Despite the mild outlook for 
demand conditions, elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose 
risks to the pricing behavior.  
Factors Affecting Inflation  
8. Data f or the first quarter of 2018 suggest a maintained strength in  economic activity.  
Although industrial production lost momentum in quarterly growth compared to previous 
quarters, its annual growth proved strong with 9.8 percent. In this period, sectors provi ding 
inetermediate inputs to the construction activity and sectors strongly affiliated to touri sm 
supported industral production. The data reveal a mild course in sectoral activities other than 
industry as well.  
9. Domestic demand stood out as  the main drive r of quarterly growth in the first quarter.  
Private consumption remained on the rise, while investments, also supported by the public 
sector, we re mainly contsruction oriented in the first quarter . Despite the sustained increase 
in gold imports,  with the r obust course in exports of goods excluding gold besides tourism 
revenues, net exports are expected to boost quarterly growth.  
10. Recently released data indicate a rebalancing trend in the economic activity. Data for the 
second quarter indicate that external d emand maintains its strength. Amid the favorable 
global growth outlook, rising external demand and flexibility in diversi fying export  markets  
continue to stimulate exports . The Committee noted that the rebound in tourism and 
transportation revenues rema ins rather brisk , and under these circumstances,  net exports 
will provide positive contribution to quarterly growth  in the second quarter as well . In the 
upcoming period, exports of goods and services are expected to boost growth further and 
the balancing i n the domestic demand is likely to halt the upward trend in the current 
account deficit . However, soaring energy prices and gold imports hinder  the improvement in 
the current account balance.  
11. Domestic demand displays a more moderate course in the second qu arter. Survey indicators 
point to a weaker consumer confidence as well as the trends of orders in firms especially 
producing for the domestic market . The current outlook signals for a domestic demand -
driven slowdown, which is consistent with past projections that economic activity would  
converge to the uynderlying trend. In the close future, rising volatility in financial markets 
and perceptions of uncertainty , the depreciation in the Turkish lira and mounting financing 
costs may restrain dom estic demand through investments . Meanwhile, accommodative fiscal 
measures are projected to moderate the slowdown in domestic demand.  
12. In the first quarter, the maintained strength of economic activity supported the increase in 
employment and the decline in unemployment. Leading indicators signal that the balancing 
in economic activity in the period ahead may result in some deceleration in the labor market 
improvement.  
13. In sum, recently released data indicate that economic activity remains strong in the first 
quarter, while it is converging to its underlying trend in the second quarter amid the 
balancing in domestic demand.   
3 Monetary Policy and Risks  
14. Current data on global economy point to stable and strong growth both in advanced and 
emerging economies. Data f or the first quarter hint at an accelerated g lobal growth 
compared to the pr evious quarter, and the prospects for the year end remain positive . 
Despite rising commodity and energy prices amid the solid growth outlook, consumer and 
core inflation rates are moderate across the globe.  
15. Risks to the global growth outlook are more on the downside for the upcoming period. Major 
risks that can pose a drag on global growth include geopolitical tensions and the rising 
protectionist sentiment in international trade. B oth the US government’s decision not to 
exempt EU member states from the additional customs tariffs on imported steel and 
aluminum and political uncertainty add to the downside risks to EU growth that slow ed down 
in the first quarter of the year . The newly  passed US tax reform is poised to provide a growth 
boost to the US and its trading partners, which is considered a major upside risk to global 
growth.  
16. After the March announcement on imposing additional customs tariffs on imported steel and 
aluminum, the  US government lifted certain country exemptions from tariffs in early June, 
sparking possibly more protectionism in international trade across the world. In fact, 
impacted trading partners are poised to impose retaliatory tariffs that would spark more 
trade protectionism. The potential negative spillovers of such policies on global growth will 
depend on the size and form of the response of other trading partners.  
17. An analysis of risks to global inflation reveals that geopolitical developments coupled with 
uncertainties regarding trade policies are likely to pose upside risks to commodity prices, 
especially to energy and metal prices. Moreover, in line with the falling unemployment rates 
in advanced economies, the possibility of wages to increase more rapidly  than current trends 
is among major risk factors to push up inflation.  
18. Financial conditions have recently tightened in advanced economies. The probability of an 
accelerated inflation due to brisk demand conditions and rising commodity prices constitutes 
a risk of triggering a faster- than -projected tightening in monetary policies across these 
countries. US bond returns have been on the rise since mid- April as the Federal Reserve (the 
Fed) hints at three policy rate hikes in the remainder of 2018. Amid the ap preciation of the 
US dollar, global financial markets have recently witnessed fluctuations, the risk sentiment 
towards  emerging economies has deteriorated, exchange rates saw depreciation and 
increased volatility and portfolio flows lost momentum.  
19. Fluctuat ing global financial markets have a tightening effect on domestic financial conditions, 
which led to a higher risk premium, slower portfolio flows, a weaker and more volatile 
Turkish lira and higher market and loan rates. Geopolitical developments and the outlook for 
macro indicators such as inflation and the current account deficit made Turkey more 
sensitive to global fluctuations. Due to higher risk premium and reduced portfolio flows, the 
Turkish lira faced more depreciation and volatility compared to ot her emerging market 
currencies.  On the credit market front, the loan boost created by the CGF support of 2017 
has largely subsided  and in addition to commercial loans, there has been a balancing in 
consumer loans, especially in housing loans.  Hence, both e xternal and domestic 
developments suggest that financial conditions will remain tight over the upcoming period.  
20. After a robust first quarter, economic activity started to converge to its underlying trend in 
the second quarter. The uncertainty over monetar y policies across advanced economies and 
geopolitical tensions feed into downside risks to economic activity. The recent financial  
4 market volatility and the mounting uncertainty pose downside risks to domestic demand and 
the growth outlook, particularly vi a investment spending. The tighter monetary policy stance 
is likely to decrease financial volatility and contain downside risks to growth. On the other 
hand, the strong tourism rebound, the upbeat global growth outlook and accommodative 
real exchange rates  are expected to provide further positive contribution to the growth 
composition and the current account balance. The Committee emphasized that the steps 
toward tighter monetary policy should be accompanied by an enhanced macro policy 
coordination to ensure a modest rebalancing  of the economy.  
21. High inflation and rising inflation expectations keep risks to pricing behavior alive. Although 
aggregate demand conditions are likely to have a steadily waning effect on inflation, the 
significant cost pressures from  the recent Turkish lira depreciation and their potential 
second -round effects weigh on the inflation outlook.  According to diffusion indices, economic 
agents are much more inclined to raise prices. The inertia in the indicators for underlying 
inflation trends and the high levels of core inflation continue to pose risks to pricing behavior. 
In addition, the recent increases in import prices, particularly for oil, add to these risks.  
22. Thus, considering the effects of unhealthy pricing and excessive volatilities across markets on 
the inflation outlook, the Central Bank introduced some adjustments for the foreign 
exchange market since the interim meeting on 23 May. These adjustments aim a t controlled 
and efficient provision of the liquidity required by the market in times of excessive volatility. 
Accordingly, on 24 May 2018, the Bank announced an update to the calendar for Turkish lira -
settled forward foreign exchange sale auctions to be h eld in the second quarter of 2018, thus 
raising the amount of forward foreign exchange sale position from 7.1 billion USD to 8 billion 
USD. Moreover, the upper limit for the total amount of forward foreign exchange sale 
position was determined to be USD 10  billion until end- 2018. Additionally, on 25  May 2018, 
the Bank decided to allow repayments of rediscount credits for export and foreign exchange 
earning services to be made in Turkish liras at a fixed exchange rate.  
23. Furthermore, on 28 May 2018, the Commit tee announced its decision to complete the 
simplification process regarding the operational framework of monetary policy. Accordingly, 
the one -week repo rate will be  the main policy rate of the Central Bank. This rate is set equal 
to the late liquidity window lending rate in effect on the date of meeting. In addition, the 
Central Bank overnight borrowing and lending rates are determined at 150 basis points 
below/above the one -week repo rate. Thus, the overnight borrowing and l ending rates will 
form a symmetrical corridor around the one -week repo auction rate, keeping market rates 
from deviating significantly from the weekly repo auction rate. The new operational 
framework that took effect on 1 June 2018 is expected to enhance t he predictability of 
monetary policy and strengthen the transmission mechanism.  
24. With the strong policy response at the interim meeting on 23 May 2018 and the simplified 
operational framework, the Committee has partially restrained the domestic financial m arket 
volatility. Nevertheless, the current elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations 
continue to pose risks on pricing behavior. Accordingly, the Committee decided to further 
strengthen the monetary tightening in June to support price stabil ity and raised the policy 
rate (one week repo auction rate) from 16.5 percent to 17.75 percent.  
25. The Central Bank will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability 
objective. Tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained decisively until inflation outlook 
displays a significant improvement.  Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors 
affecting inflation will be closely monitored and, if needed, further monetary tightening will 
be delivered.   
5 26. Public finance ha s been providing more support to disinflation, which confirms the stronger 
coordination between monetary and fiscal policies. The joint efforts to transform policy 
coordination into a continuous and systematic framework will contribute to disinflation in 
2018 as well.  
27. Developments in fiscal policy and tax adjustments are monitored closely with regard to their 
effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline monetary policy stance is formulated under the 
assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained and  there will be no unanticipated hikes 
in administered prices and taxes. A revision of the monetary policy stance may be 
considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from this framework, and 
consequently have an adverse effect on the medium -term inflation outlook.  
28. In recent years, sustaining fiscal discipline has been one of the key factors in lowering the 
sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external shocks. The room provided by fiscal 
discipline facilitated the implementation of an expa nsionary fiscal policy. Structural measures 
to provide room for counter -cyclical fiscal policies will enhance the coordination of monetary 
and fiscal policy, and improve macroeconomic stability. Moreover, sustaining structural steps 
to reduce inertia and v olatility in inflation will contribute positively to the price stability and 
social welfare.  
 
 