 
Central Bank of the Republic of Tur key  
(Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası ) 
Head Office  
(İdare Merkezi ) 
Anafartalar Mah. İstiklal Cad. No:10 06050  
Ulus Altındağ Ankara +90 (312) 507 50 00  
www.tcmb.gov.tr   
Press Release on Financial Markets   
13 August  2018, No: 2018 -31 
 
To support financial stability and sustain the effective functioning of markets , the following 
measures have been introduced : 
I. Turkish lira liquidity management : 
1) In the framework of  intraday and overnight standing  facilities, the Central Bank will  
provide all the liquidity  the banks need . 
2) Discount r ates for collaterals against Tur kish lira transactions will be revised based on type 
and maturity, thus providing banks  with flexibility in their collateral management. Through 
this r egulation, the discounted value  of banks’ current unencumbered  collaterals is 
projected to increase by approximately 3 ,8 billion Turkish  liras.  
3) Collateral  FX deposit limits for Turkish lira transactions of banks have been raised to 20 
billion euros from 7 ,2 billion euros . 
4) As cited  in the Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy Text for 2018, when deemed 
necessary, in addition to one -week repo auctions , which are  the main funding instrument 
of the Central Bank , traditional repo auctions or deposit selling auctions may be held with 
maturities no longer than 91 days.  
5) For the days with relatively higher funding need , more than one repo auction may be 
conduc ted with maturities between 6 and  10 days . 
6) To provide flexibility in banks’ collateral management, upon the request of banks, a 
portion of or the entire amount of the winning bids in one -week repo auctions will  be 
allowed to be used in  deposit transaction s instead of repo transactions at the Central 
Bank  Interbank Money Market with the same interest rate and maturity.    
 
II. FX liquidity management : 
1)      Banks will be able to borrow FX deposits in one-month maturi ty in addition to one -
week maturity .  
2)      The C entral Bank  will resu me its intermediary function at  the FX deposit market. 
Accordingly, through the intermediation of the C entral Bank , banks will be able to borrow 
from and lend to each other at the FX deposit market as per the rules set by th e 
Implementation Instructions on the Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets.  
 
 
Central Bank of the Republic of Tur key  
(Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası ) 
Head Office  
(İdare Merkezi ) 
Anafartalar Mah. İstiklal Cad. No:10 06050  
Ulus Altındağ Ankara +90 (312) 507 50 00  
www.tcmb.gov.tr  3)      Banks’ current foreign exchange deposit limits of around 50 billion US dollars may be 
increased and utilization conditions may be improved if deemed necessary.  
4)      Banks will  continue to purchase foreign banknotes  from the Central Bank  via foreign 
exchange transactions  within the ir pre -determined  limits at the Foreign Exchange and 
Banknotes Markets.  
The C entral Bank  will closely monitor the market depth and price formations, and take all 
necessary measures to maintain financial stability, if deemed necessary . 
 
 
Contact  
For further information, you may send an e -mail to  basin@tcmb.gov.tr . 
  
 
 