 
1  
Summary of the Monetary Policy 
Committee Meeting  
31 October  2018, No: 201 8-46 
Meeting Date : 25 October  2018  
Inflation Developments  
1. In September, consumer prices rose by 6.30 percent and annual inflation increased by 6.62 
points to 24.52 percent. Price increases spread across subcategories in this period. Effects of 
exchange rate developments were apparent in many items, particularly on core goods, while 
items with relatively low excha nge rate pass -through also recorded noticeable price hikes. 
Elevated exchange rate volatility weighed on inflation  uncertainty , while backward -
indexation in inflation trended upwards and exchange rate pass -through to consumer 
inflation remained strong, whi ch resulted in a notable deterioration in the pricing behavior. 
Although aggregate demand conditions started to support disinflation, the course of 
consumer inflation was mostly shaped by the elevated producer  inflation -driven cost 
pressures. Against this background, both the annual inflation and the underlying trend of 
core indicators recorded a sharp increase.  
2. Annual inflation in food and non -alcoholic beverages rose by 7.95 points to 27.70 percent in 
September. This period was marked by accelerated tende ncy for price hikes both in 
processed and unprocessed food items, and all subcategories witnessed price  increases. 
Leading indicators for October point out that food inflation is yet to increase.  
3. In September, energy prices increased by 6.05 percent and an nual inflation in this group rose 
by 5.69 points to 27.03 percent. This rise was mainly driven by price adjustments in electricity 
and natural gas as well as increase d fuel oil prices due to the lingering  effect of Special 
Consumption Tax (SCT) arrangements  in August. Oil prices trended upwards in this period, 
but the continued sliding -scale tariff restricted the possible upside risks to inflation. The rise 
in energy inflation is likely to move further upwards in October due to the price adjustme nts 
in electricity and natural gas.   
4. Annual core goods inflation rose by 11.94 points to 35.12 percent in September. This rise was 
led by the sharp depreciation in the Turkish lira, and prices increased across all 
subcategories. Considerable price increase s were seen particularly in  durable  goods with high 
imported content (12.93 percent) and other core goods (11.22 percent). Moreover, the 
clothing group registered price hikes above seasonal norms. Core goods inflation is expected 
to follow a favorable cour se in October particularly due to durable goods supported by the 
recent appreciation in the Turkish lira coupled with the SCT base arrangement in 
automobiles. In addition  the All -Out War on Inflation Program is also considered to underpin 
the downtrend in inflation in the short term.   
5. Annual services inflation increased by 2.13 points to 13.97 percent month -on-month. The 
rise in the restaurants -hotels and transportation services inflation went up due to the cost -
 
2 side factors led by food and fuel oil prices as well as the brisk outlook in tourism. Meanwhile, 
the uptrend in other services inflation is attributed to the reverberations of exchange rate 
developments accompanied by the price hikes in education services driven by the high levels 
of headl ine inflation.  
Factors Affecting Inflation  
6. Recently released data show that the rebalancing trend in the economy has become more 
noticeable.  Composite indicator s of domestic demand signal a notable deceleration both in 
private consumption and investment expenditures, while the central government budget 
data show that the public expenditures’ direct support to growth recorded a decline 
compared to the previous period.  External demand mainta ins its strength  in contrast to 
slowing domestic demand. Amid a stable global growth outlook, rising external demand and 
flexibility in diversifying export markets continue to stimulate exports. The Committee noted 
that the brisk course of revenues from to urism and other servic es notably boosted the 
contribution of  net exports to quarterly growth in the third quarter. In the upcoming period, 
exports of goods and services are expected to boost growth further and the slowdown in 
import demand resulting from t he subdued domestic demand is likely to maintain its positive 
effect on the current account balance.   
7. The slowdown in economic activity continues, partly due to tighter financial conditions.  
Survey indicators for  the last quarter show that the downtrend i n the capacity utilization rate  
of the manufacturing industry continues across all subcategories. The deceleration  in the 
indicators for  produ ction and orders of domestic market -oriented sectors, p articularly  
sectors affiliated to construction, confirms thi s outlook. Prospects for exports and tourism -
linked activities seem relatively better, yet the stance for employment and investment has 
recorded an overall worsening.  
8. The labor market data confirmed the evaluations that the economy lost pace in the third 
quarter due to the domestic demand. Sectors affiliated to foreign trade and government 
offered positive contributions to the services employment. However, the fall in construction 
employment continued and the industrial employment registered a decline compa red to the 
previous period . Leading indicators signal  a sustained increase in unemployment rates.  
9. Credit  conditions have remained to be tight  in the third quarter . In addition, the propensity 
to save in public expenditures coupled with the rise in unemployment rates hint at a further 
deceleration in domestic demand. Net exports are likely to boost growth further in the last 
quarter and curb the slowdown in economic a ctivity to some extent.  
10. In sum, recently  released data for the third quarter and the leading indicators for the last 
quarter point that the real adjustment in the economy continues  with full speed and the 
rebalancing trend has become more pronounced. Linge ring tight financial conditions 
main tain the downside risks to the magnitude  and duration of the slowdown in economic 
activity.  
Monetary Policy and Risks  
11. The Committee evaluated the medium -term inflation forecasts for the October Inflation 
Report  as well . Accordingly, compared to the July forecast, year -end consumer inflation 
forecasts for 2018 and 2019 have been revised upwards by 10.1 points and 5.9 points, 
respectively. Under a tight policy stance focusing on bringing inflation down accompanied by 
reinfo rced policy coordination, inflation is projected to converge gradually to the targets. In 
this respect, inflation is projected to be 23.5 percent at end -2018, and then fall to 15.2  
3 percent at end -2019 and 9.3 percent at end -2020 before stabilizing around  5 percent in the 
medium term. Forecasts are based on a monetary policy framework that envisages that the 
tight monetary policy stance will be maintained for an extended period.  
12. Recent developments regarding the inflation outlook point to significant risks t o price 
stability. Price increases have shown a generalized pattern across subsectors, reflecting the 
movements in exchange rates. Although weaker domestic demand conditions will partially 
mitigate the deterioration in the inflation outlook, upside risks t o the pricing behavior 
continue to prevail. The significant increase in producer prices -driven cost -side pressures,  
and the elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks to the 
inflation outlook in the coming period. Accordingly, the Committee has decided to maintain 
the tight monetary policy stance and keep the policy rate (one week repo auction rate) 
constant at 24 percent.  
13. The Central Bank will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability 
objective. The tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained decisively until the inflation 
outlook displays a significant improvement. Inflation expectations, pricing behavior, lagged 
impact of recent monetary policy decisions, contribution  of fiscal policy to the rebalancing 
process, and other factors affecting inflation will be closely monitored and if needed, further 
monetary tightening will be delivered.  
14. The outlook that the medium -term projections presented in the Inflation Report  are based 
on is shaped by the Monetary Policy Committee's judgments and assumptions. Nevertheless, 
various risks to these factors may affect the inflation outlook and necessitate changes in the 
monetary policy stance envisaged in the baseline scenario. The Comm ittee noted that risks to 
the medium -term inflation outlook are mostly on the upside.  
15. The primary risk to inflation outlook in the upcoming period would be a further deterioration 
in pricing behavior. In recent months, the exchange rate pas s-through to the  consumer 
inflation  has firmed, backward indexation has become more widespread, and pricing 
behavior has deteriorated considerably. Although it is believed that exchange rate -related 
inflationary pressures will remain relatively subdued under current circu mstances, risks to 
the inflation outlook remain solid amid highly volatile exchange rates. In case of a failure in 
implementing the macroeconomic rebalancing process rapidly and effectively enough to 
bring inflation down amid high inflation rates and risk premium levels, inflation and exchange 
rate expectations may feed each other and undermine the disinflation process. In such a 
case, any further deterioration in pricing behavior may necessitate a tighter -than -envisaged 
monetary policy stance for a longer time in order to lower inflation.  
16. Crude oil prices and domestic food prices are also considered to constitute upside risks to 
inflation in the upcoming period. Although problems in the US regarding the supply of shale 
oil have been largely settled in the r ecent period, the supply shortage due to geopolitical 
developments in Iran and Venezuela continues to be the major upside risk to crude oil prices. 
On the other hand, increased protectionism in global trade stands out as a downward risk 
factor for commodit y prices due to its likely adverse effect on global growth. Risks related to 
domestic food prices are projected to be on the upside because of cumulative cost -side 
pressures, particularly in the short term. In this framework, the monetary policy response w ill 
be determined in such a way to curb a possible deterioration in inflation expectations and 
pricing behavior, taking into account the direct and secondary effects of respective risks on 
inflation.  
17. The deteriorated pricing behavior, tight financial condi tions and the financial state of the 
corporate sector have recently caused inflation dynamics to change and the uncertainty over  
4 inflation and forecasts to rise. The cumulative cost pressures on firms and the decrease in 
their profitability, coupled with i ncreased working capital costs  and the backward indexation 
behaviour in wages , may cause the disinflationary impact of the demand channel to be more 
limited  compared to the implications of the historical data . In the short -run, monetary policy 
decisions will be more sensitive to incoming data  and the monetary policy stance will be 
revised upon detection of changes in the inflation outlook.  
18. In the third quarter of the year, credit conditions recorded a significantly higher tightening 
than historical averag es due to incresing risk premiums . The rate and extent of the 
normalization to be observed in credit conditions in the upcoming period are important in 
terms of the outlook of economic activity. As cash flows and balance sheets of firms have 
been adversely  affected by the increase in exchange rates and loan rates as well as by the 
slowdown in economic activity, conducting the necessary assessments and analyses related 
to the asset  qualit y of firms will have a decisive role in the credit  market.  Therefore, 
establishing a coordination between the  financial sector policies that restrict the balance 
sheet effects of the corporate sector and the monetary policy that focuses on inflation has 
become crucial for preventing the financial conditions from falling into  an unproductive 
tightening cycle.  
19. There are also risks stemming from global monetary policies and risk appetite developments 
that may lead to a decline in capital flows towards emerging economies and feed into 
exchange rate volatility. The sustained monet ary tightening trend and the increase in bond 
yields in advanced economies, heightened protectionism in global trade, Brexit 
developments, concerns over the budget deficit and sovereign debt of Italy, and imminent 
sanctions on Iran may cause the risk appet ite for emerging economies to display a fluctuating 
pattern in the upcoming period. This, in turn, may pose a downside risk to portfolio flows  to 
emerging economies . In case of excessive market volatility due to fluctuations in global 
liquidity conditions and in perceptions of risk, the CBRT may use liquidity measures intended 
for providing the market with the needed FX liquidity in a timely, controlled and effective 
manner. In addition, it may introduce additional tightening in monetary policy to curb the 
impact of these risks on inflation and inflation expectations.  
20. The coordination between the monetary policy and the fiscal policy is very crucial with 
respect to disinflation and macroeconomic rebalancing. The fiscal policy outlook  that t he 
medium -term pr ojection s in the Inflation Report are based on incorporates a policy stance  
that focuses on disinflation and macroeconomic rebalancing and that is coordinated with the 
monetary policy , which is in line with the New Economy Program announced  in September . 
Accordingly, the projection s rest on an outlook where the fiscal policy introduces a tight fiscal 
discipline , as envisaged in the New Econom y Program . Moreover, it is assum ed that 
administered prices, tax and wage  adjustments will be  formulated in a way th at will help 
reduce the backward -indexation behavior. If the fiscal policy significantly deviates from this 
framework leading to an adverse impact on the medium -term inflation outlook, the 
monetary policy stance may be revised.  
21. Collective efforts to turn t he recently enhanced coordination between monetary and fiscal 
policies into a sustained and systematic structure are expected to support the fight against 
inflation. Moreover, continued structural steps focusing on reducing rigidity and volatility in 
infla tion will contribute to price stability and social welfare.  
 