Summary of the Monetary Policy
Committee Meeting
14 March 2018, No:2018-06
Meeting Date: 7 March 2018

Inflation Developments
1.

In February, consumer prices rose by 0.73 percent and annual inflation receded by 0.09
points to 10.26 percent. Annual inflation was down in energy and core goods, but up in food
and services. Energy inflation was pulled down by falling oil prices as well as relatively stable
exchange rates. Annual core goods inflation slowed slightly while food inflation was driven
higher by both processed and unprocessed food prices. Thus, the annual inflation of core
indicators recorded a small decrease while their underlying trend remained high.

2.

Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages was up by 1.51 points to 10.27 percent
in February. Annual unprocessed food inflation accelerated to 6.71 percent, due to rising
prices of fresh fruits and vegetables as well as higher milk and red meat prices. On this
account, being adversely affected, annual processed food inflation hit a nine-year high of
13.76 percent. In this category, prices of cheese and other dairy goods, fats and processed
meat recorded sharp gains. In addition, bread prices that went up due to the adjustment in
the Bread Regulation and prices of nonalcoholic beverages that were driven higher by the
new Special Consumption Tax (SCT) applied to some beverages put upward pressure on
annual processed food inflation.

3.

Energy prices fell by 0.58 percent in February amid sliding international oil prices and
moderating exchange rates, and annual inflation dropped to 6.92 percent in this category.

4.

Annual services inflation increased by 0.14 points to 9.37 percent in February, largely due to
the subcategory of other services, the inflation of which was pushed up by rising prices of
package tours and health services. Meanwhile, annual inflation was relatively flat in rents,
restaurants-hotels and telecommunications, but continued to decline in transport services.

5.

Annual core goods inflation fell by 0.65 points to 14.93 percent in February. Annual inflation
was down across all subcategories yet remained high. The rise in annual clothing inflation
was prompted by cumulative cost developments and robust aggregate demand conditions.
Prices of durable goods posted a month-on-month increase due to furniture and automobile
prices. Other core goods, on the other hand, saw a lower annual inflation rate thanks to base
effects but their prices were up due to home maintenance-repair and medicines. It should be
noted that the remaining impact of the mid-February increase of 15 percent in medicine
prices caused by the reference exchange rate will also be felt in March.

6.

In sum, current elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks
to the pricing behavior. Underlying trend indicators display inertia and core inflation remains
elevated.
1

Factors Affecting Inflation
7.

Recently released data indicate that economic activity maintains its strength. Industrial
production continued to grow in the fourth quarter, albeit at a slower rate. However, this
deceleration stems from the slack in sectors subject to tax incentives, particularly furniture,
whereas other sectors see no loss of momentum. Survey indicators hint at strong industrial
output across subsectors for January and February. Indicators for services and trade remain
moderate while the tourism rebound bolsters economic growth.

8.

Domestic demand continues to expand. Private consumption growth is expected to lose
some pace over the fourth quarter following the expired tax incentives for home appliances
and furniture. On the other hand, current indicators show that machinery-equipment
investments have been improving since the third quarter.

9.

The upbeat growth outlook across the globe, particularly in the European Union (EU), rising
external demand and Turkey’s flexibility in diversifying export markets continue to stimulate
exports. Notwithstanding the recovering import demand aided by the buoyant economy,
gains in exports of goods helped slow down the deterioration of the core current-accountdeficit indicators. The uptrend in exports of goods, coupled with the ongoing tourism
rebound, will likely contribute further to the current account balance over the upcoming
period. The Committee noted that the contribution of net exports to quarterly GDP growth
will increase in the fourth quarter owing to brisk exports accompanied by slowing gold
imports.

10. The second and third-quarter recovery in the labor market continued into the fourth quarter,
confirming that economic activity remains strong. Employment surged in services and
construction sectors in this period, but remained constant in the industrial sector compared
to the previous period. Survey data hints at further employment gains and lower
unemployment rates for the upcoming period. The Committee highlighted that employment
gains failed to fully pass through to unemployment rates due to the upswing in labor force
participation. Thus, unemployment rates are expected to decline gradually in the period
ahead.
11. In short, recently released data indicate that economic activity maintains its strength.
Domestic demand continues to expand and external demand contributes positively to
exports.

Monetary Policy and Risks
12. Fourth-quarter data of the previous year on global growth signal continued simultaneous
recovery in both advanced and emerging economies. PMI indicators pointing to growth for
both markets and the upgraded growth forecasts, particularly for the EU, confirm the steady
economic rebound across the globe.
13. The primary downside risks to the global economic outlook for the upcoming period are the
geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and the heightened protectionism clouding
international trade negotiations. In fact, the recent US plan to impose extra customs tariffs
on imported steel and aluminum might spark more protectionism in foreign trade across the
world. Moreover, the newly passed US tax reform has provided a growth boost to the US and
its trading partners, which is considered an upside risk factor for the world economy.
14. Global inflation may fluctuate amid changes in commodity and oil prices, yet remains low,
while global core inflation follows a flat course. Upside risks to global inflation reside for the
2

period ahead. Oil prices stand out as a main factor to distort the steady course of global
inflation rates. A second risk factor to stimulate global inflation is the possibility of an upsurge
in wages following the fall in unemployment rates in advanced economies. In fact, following
the announcment of the US labor market data in early February, acceleration in inflation
proved more likely.
15. With the Federal Reserve (Fed) and the European Central Bank (ECB) in the lead, major
central banks continue to normalize monetary policy. However, risks to monetary tightening
are more on the upside due to the possibility of accelerating inflation. In fact, higher volatility
emerged in global financial markets and, particularly in the US, a decline was witnessed in the
stock exchange amid concerns over the possibility of accelerating inflation and faster-thanprojected monetary tightening by the Fed following the labor market data in the US. The
stronger growth outlook also for the European Union is likely to cause a sooner-thanexpected tightening in the ECB’s monetary policy. Unless upside surprises occur in inflation in
the period ahead, it is considered that the Fed’s and the ECB’s steps towards normalization
will be in line with expectations.
16. The favorable global economic outlook and trade volume as well as the ongoing global risk
appetite drive strong portfolio flows into emerging economies. The recent sharp movements
in the US stock market had more limited impacts on the stock markets of emerging
economies with sounder macroeconomic fundamentals compared to the past. It is estimated
that portfolio inflows will continue in the case of sustained economic recovery in emerging
economies and a moderate course in monetary policy normalization of advanced economies
in 2018 as well.
17. With the diminishing effect of the macroprudential incentives and the CGF support granted
last year in Turkey, credit growth reverted to historical averages. Meanwhile, underpinned
also by the robust domestic demand, loan rates trended upwards. In 2018, the release of the
new CGF-backed tranches is expected to accelerate the extension of credits, particularly for
investment purposes. Financing the new credits, to be extended by banks, through core
liabilities and long-term resources is significant. Effects of growth and composition of credits
on aggregate demand and economic activity are monitored closely.
18. The reduced support of the additional credit boost to growth and the expiry of tax incentives
on durable goods have led domestic demand to lose pace and economic growth to move
towards its underlying trend as of the fourth quarter of 2017. In 2018, in addition to the
fading effect accommodative policies of 2017, the tight monetary stance and the fiscal
measures under the MTP are likely to appear as the main drivers of loan growth and a
normalized economic activity. Meanwhile, the continued support from the CGF, albeit
limited, will stand as a factor to stimulate domestic demand in 2018. The steady recovery in
tourism, the improving global growth outlook and the favorable course of the real exchange
rate are expected to contribute further to growth and the current account balance in the
coming months through the export channel. Against this background, uncertainties over
monetary policies of major central banks, the course of capital flows and geopolitical
developments remain a key element of economic activity. Exchange rate volatility that may
arise from such factors poses a downside risk to the timing and strength of the support that
financial conditions could provide to economic activity.
19. Current elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks to the
pricing behavior. The hikes in processed food prices in the last couple of months disclose
persisting risks to food inflation. Producer-driven cost pressures remain brisk. Costs in
energy, particularly electricity, exhibit an uptick. The upbeat economic activity also acts in the
3

appearance of cost pressures on inflation. All these developments maintain brisk risks to the
core inflation outlook, particularly to the core goods inflation.
20. Accordingly, the Committee decided to maintain the tight monetary policy stance and kept
the Late Liquidity Window (LON) lending rate at 12.75 percent. The CBRT will continue to use
all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability objective. The tight stance in
monetary policy will be maintained decisively until the inflation outlook displays a significant
improvement, independent of base effects and temporary factors, and becomes consistent
with the targets. The Committee formulates monetary policy by taking the medium-term
inflation into account, thus focusing on the developments in underlying inflation rather than
the anticipated fluctuations driven by the base effects during the course of the year. Inflation
expectations, the pricing behavior and other factors affecting inflation will be closely
monitored, and, if needed, further monetary tightening will be delivered.
21. Developments in fiscal policy and tax adjustments are monitored closely with regard to their
effects on the inflation outlook. The baseline monetary policy stance is formulated under the
assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes
in administered prices and taxes. A revision of the monetary policy stance may be
considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from this framework, and
consequently have an adverse effect on the medium-term inflation outlook.
22. In recent years, sustaining fiscal discipline has been one of the key factors in lowering the
sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external shocks. The room provided by fiscal
discipline facilitated the implementation of an expansionary fiscal policy. Structural measures
to provide room for counter-cyclical fiscal policies will enhance the coordination of monetary
and fiscal policy, and improve macroeconomic stability. Moreover, continuation of structural
steps to reduce inertia and volatility in inflation will contribute positively to the price stability
and social welfare.

4

