 
Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
Hacı Bayram  Mah. İstiklal Cad. No:10 06050  
Ulus Altındağ Ankara +90 (312) 507 50 00 
www.tcmb.gov.tr   
Press Release on Reserve Requirements  
9 December  2019, No.  2019 -47 
 
A revision is made to the reserve requirement regulation  that links the reserve 
requirement ratios and remuneration rates to loan growth rates . 
The main policy tool of the CBRT is short -term interest rates. Reserve requirements are used 
flexibly  and effective ly as a counter -cyclical macroprudential t ool to support this  main monetary 
policy tool . In this regard , as previously announced on 19 August  2019, the reserve requirement 
ratios for Turkish lira liabilities and the remuneration rates for Turkish lira -denominated required 
reserves have been linked t o the annual growth rates of T urkish lira- denominated cash loans .  
On the back of the robust capital and liquidity structure of the banking system,  the fall in interest 
rates driven by the improvement in inflation and expectations, and the recovery trend in 
economic activity, it  is expected  that  
► the favorable outlook in loan supply and demand conditions  which started in the second 
half of 2019 will continue in 2020 , 
► the loan growth will be consistent with the inflation target and growth projections for 
2020 and will be mainly driven  by Turkish lira loans.  
The cautious monetary policy backed by fiscal policy  has significantly improved the inflation trend , 
while the current reserve requirement practice has supported loan growth and financial stability . 
At this stage  of rebalancing in the economy , it is assessed that it will be useful to have a reserve 
requirement practice that will underpin financial stabil ity by encouraging the channeling  of loan 
supply to production -oriented sectors rather than consumption -oriented ones and that will 
reduce the need to update the band width.   
In this framework, considering also the low base effect on loans in 2019 , a revi sion is made in  the 
reserve requ irement s. According  to new regulation , 
(i) The real change in T urkish lira cash loans will be taken into account in the calculation of 
loan growth .  
(ii) The real annual growth rate of loans will be calculated based on the last three -month 
average of the real cash loan stock values, and the calculations will exclude the loans 
extended to financial institutions .  
(iii) The real cash loan value will be calculated via dividing the nominal loan amount by the CPI 
in the relevant period.   
(iv) Banks will be ab le to benefit from reserve requirement incentives under the following 
conditions:  
 
Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
Hacı Bayram  Mah. İstiklal Cad. No:10 06050  
Ulus Altındağ Ankara +90 (312) 507 50 00 
www.tcmb.gov.tr  a. For banks with a real annual loan growth rate above 1 5%: If their adjusted real 
loan growth rate, which is calculated by deducting the entire real change s in the 
commercial loans with a two -year and longer maturity and housing loans with a 
five-year and longer maturity  from the numerator of the growth rate  formula , is 
below 15%, 
b. For banks with a real annual loan growth rate below 15% : If their adjusted real 
loan growth rate, which is calculated by deducting 50% of the real change in retail 
loans excluding housing loans with a five -year and longer maturity  from the 
numerator  of the growth ra te formula , is above 5 %. 
Thus , long -term commercial loans that have a strong  relation with  production and 
investment, and long -term housing loans that have a weak relation with imports will be 
encouraged .  
(v) Loan growth rates will be calculated for every res erve requirement  period , and banks with 
real annual loan growth rates complying with the defined conditions will  be subject to 
related reserve  requirement  ratios and remuneration rates throughout  the following 
three months  (six reserve requirement maintenance periods ). 
(vi) The implementation will be valid from the calculation period dated 29 November  2019 . 
The rights of banks, which  have  earned the right to lower reserve re quirement ratios and 
higher remuneration  rates under the previous method as of th is calculation period, will be 
reserved .   
 
Contact   
For further information, you may send an e -mail to basin@tcmb.gov.tr.  
 
  