Press Release on Summary of the
Monetary Policy Committee Meeting
19 September 2019, No: 2019-37
Meeting Date: 12 September 2019

Inflation Developments
1.

In August, consumer prices rose by 0.86%, while annual inflation decreased by 1.64 points to
15.01%. The fall in inflation was mainly driven by the core goods and energy groups, while
the downtrend in annual food inflation continued. In addition to the stable course of the
Turkish lira, improved inflation expectations, commodity prices, and domestic demand
conditions supported the decline in the annual inflation of core indicators. Against this
background, core indicators maintained their mild course. Inflation will register a significant
fall in September due also to the high base from the previous year.

2.

In the food and non-alcoholic beverages group, annual inflation fell by 0.99 points to 17.22%
in August. In this period, annual inflation lost pace both in unprocessed and processed food
groups. Monthly increases in processed food prices, which has surged since May due to the
lagged cost effects, lost pace in August. Leading indicators show that the slowdown in annual
food inflation continues in September.

3.

In August, energy prices rose by 0.34%. In this period, the mild course of the Turkish lira and
the decline in oil prices pulled fuel prices down, curbing the effect of the rise in natural gas
prices. Despite the upside impact of the adjustments in natural gas prices in September,
annual energy inflation is projected to decline further due to the base effect. Prices of
tobacco products soared by 20.84%, adding 0.99 points to the group’s contribution to annual
inflation.

4.

In August, annual core goods inflation decreased by 4.79 points to 13.02%, mainly due to
durables and other core goods, while annual inflation in the clothing group posted a limited
rise. Despite price increases in white goods, prices of durable goods registered a decline due
to falling automobile prices. Prices of other core goods have recorded a month-on-month
decline, albeit limited, for the first time since June 2010. The high base effect from the
previous year accompanied by the recent exchange rate developments and the mild course
of economic activity supports the fall in core goods inflation.

5.

Services prices rose by 1.12% in August while annual services inflation inched down by 0.38
points to 14.19%. Annual inflation declined in restaurants-hotels and communication groups
whereas it remained flat in rents and transport groups and increased in the other services
group. The catering services-driven slowdown in the restaurants-hotels group is also
attributed to the moderate course of food prices. The other services group posted a large
monthly increase that was mainly triggered by the rise in private university tuition fees.
Against this background, the underlying trend of services inflation displayed a modest
deceleration. In this period, the downward impact of domestic demand conditions on
1

services inflation is believed to have been restrained by cumulative cost increases in some
items, real unit labor costs and the backward indexation behavior. It is projected that there
will be price increases in transport services in September due to urban transport fares.

Factors Affecting Inflation
6.

Recently released data indicate that moderate recovery in economic activity continues. In
July, industrial production increased month-on-month by 4.3% in seasonally and calendaradjusted terms, showing that the decline observed in June due to the impact of the extended
religious holiday was a temporary one. This outlook is preserved even when the other
transport vehicles sector, which has recently stimulated industrial production, is excluded.
Leading indicators point to a continued moderate recovery trend in the third quarter and to
a partial improvement in the sectoral diffusion of economic activity.

7.

Goods and services exports continue to display an upward trend despite the weakening in
the global economic outlook, indicating improved competitiveness. In particular, strong
tourism revenues support the economic activity through direct and indirect channels.
Despite recent signs of a partial global slowdown, particularly for the European Union (EU),
external demand maintains its relative strength. Notwithstanding the somewhat slowing
exports to the EU, the seasonally-adjusted non-gold export quantity index continued to rise
amid strong exports to other regions. In the same period, the number of foreign visitors and
travel and transport revenues remained on a firm uptrend while exports of services
continued to boost growth. Economy-wide spillovers from the robust course of tourism to
sectors such as nondurable goods production, clothing in particular, and transport services
help offset part of the weak domestic demand.

8.

The composition of growth is having a positive impact on the external balance. Firms’
orientation towards external markets due to the domestic demand outlook, and their
flexibility in market diversification stimulate exports of goods. The lagged effects of exchange
rates and the modest outlook for loans and economic activity restrain import demand, and
external balance continues to improve at an accelerated pace thanks to the upbeat in
tourism activity. Thus, the current account balance is expected to maintain its improving
trend.

9.

Labor market data is relatively weak. According to May 2019 data, nonfarm employment
declined while nonfarm unemployment rate rose compared to April figures. Across sectors,
industrial employment remained almost flat while employment in the services and
construction sectors fell compared to the previous period.

10. In sum, looking forward, net exports are expected to contribute to economic growth and the
improvement in risk premium and financial conditions with the help of the disinflation trend
is likely to support the gradual recovery. Against this background, aggregate demand
conditions are estimated to make a further contribution to disinflation.

Monetary Policy and Risks
11. Global economic activity lost further pace due to the deceleration in the euro area and China
in particular, and leading indicators, primarily the manufacturing sector-related data, posted
a decline, signaling that the deceleration will continue. The persistent trade tensions
between the US and China coupled with the possibility of protectionist measures spreading
across other countries, a more apparent slowdown in the euro area, lingering uncertainties
regarding the Brexit and other geopolitical developments cause the uncertainty over global

2

economic policies to remain elevated and the vulnerabilities in global financial markets to
continue. All these factors keep the downside risks to global economic activity alive.
12. Commodity prices maintain their demand-driven decline due to the deceleration of global
economic activity, supporting the disinflation in advanced and emerging economies. Besides
the slowdown in global economic activity, the increased excess supply in crude oil points to a
moderate course in crude oil prices in the period ahead, yet geopolitical risks remain
significant.
13. Recently, advanced economy central banks have started to adopt more expansionary policies
as global economic activity weakened and downside risks to inflation heightened. While
these developments support the demand for emerging market assets and the risk appetite,
rising protectionism and uncertainty regarding global economic policies pose downside risks
to these portfolio flows towards emerging markets. These factors are closely monitored in
terms of their potential impacts on financial markets and domestic economic activity through
both capital flows and international trade.
14. Although Turkey’s risk premium dropped in the second half of June amid a cautious
monetary stance, improved macroeconomic indicators and major central banks’ move to
quantitative easing, it has been volatile since then. The persistence of high levels of country
risk premium and exchange rate volatility as well as ongoing global uncertainties and
geopolitical risks keep the upside risks to the medium-term inflation outlook alive.
15. July’s rate cut and expectations of further rate cuts thereafter helped bring loan and deposit
rates markedly down from the previous MPC period. Notwithstanding lower deposit rates,
the stable Turkish lira and improved inflation expectations drove Turkish lira deposits higher.
Consumer loans have been on the rise amid accommodative credit packages and seasonal
needs whereas commercial loan growth has been flat due to supply-side effects caused by
expectations for the overall economic outlook as well as delayed loan demand and weak
investments. Improvement in the liquidity and capital adequacy ratios of banking sector and
lower interest rates are likely to provide a boost to loan growth in the upcoming period. The
outlook for economic activity will largely depend on the pace, scope and sustainability of the
normalization in credit conditions.
16. Despite the restrictive impact of domestic demand conditions on inflation, the current levels
of inflation expectations continue to pose an upside risk to the medium-term inflation
outlook. Anchoring inflation expectations is crucial for a more effective monetary policy and
a reduced inflation-growth tradeoff.
17. The course of food prices constitutes one of the risk factors that may affect the short-term
inflation outlook. The accumulated cost effect on processed food prices have mostly
terminated and prices in this group have posted a limited rise in August. The unprocessed
food inflation remains favorable. In this framework, the risks that the course of food prices
may pose to the short-term inflation outlook are lower than the July Inflation Report
forecasts.
18. The inflation outlook continued to improve. Domestic demand conditions and the level of
monetary tightness continue to support disinflation. Underlying trend indicators, supply side
factors, and import prices lead to an improvement in the inflation outlook. In light of these
developments, recent forecast revisions suggest that inflation is likely to materialize slightly
below the projections of the July Inflation Report by the end of the year. Accordingly,
considering all the factors affecting the inflation outlook, the Committee decided to reduce

3

the policy rate by 325 basis points. At this point, the current monetary policy stance, to a
large part, is considered to be consistent with the projected disinflation path.
19. The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is the key for
achieving lower sovereign risk, lower long-term interest rates, and stronger economic
recovery. Keeping the disinflation process in track with the targeted path requires the
continuation of a cautious monetary stance. In this respect, the extent of the monetary
tightness will be determined by considering the indicators of the underlying inflation trend to
ensure the continuation of the disinflation process. The Central Bank will continue to use all
available instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stability objectives.
20. The Committee emphasized the importance of sustaining the recent improvement in the
country risk premium for the price and financial stability objectives. In this context, in order
to support the effectiveness of monetary policy and minimize a likely inflation-growth tradeoff, it will be crucial that macro-financial policies are determined with a focus on reducing
financial volatility and risk premium, and that the predictability of fiscal policy continues to
be reinforced.
21. The fiscal policy outlook that the monetary policy is based on incorporates a policy stance
that focuses on price stability and macroeconomic rebalancing and that is coordinated with
the monetary policy. Accordingly, the monetary policy stance assumes that administered
price and tax adjustments are formulated in a way that will help reduce the backward
indexation behavior. If the fiscal policy significantly deviates from this framework leading to
an adverse impact on the medium-term inflation outlook, the monetary policy stance may be
revised.
22. Collective efforts to turn the recently enhanced coordination between monetary and fiscal
policies into a sustained and systematic structure are expected to support the achievement
of price stability. Moreover, continued structural steps focusing on reducing rigidity and
volatility in inflation will contribute to price stability and therefore social welfare.
23. It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise
its stance.

4

