 
1  
Summary of the Monetary Policy 
Committee Meeting  
30 April  2019, No: 201 9-18 
Meeting Date : 25 April  2019  
Inflation Developments  
1. In March, consumer prices were up  by 1.03% and annual inflation rose by 0.04 points to  
19.71%. In this period, annual inflation increased  in food and energy groups while it 
decreased in the core goods group. The rise in annual food inflation was driven by the 
significant hike in prices of fresh fruits an d veg etables. Energy prices rose mainly due to  
international oil prices and exchange rate developments. While services inflation followed an 
almost flat course, the slowdown  in core goods inflation continued  across all subgroups . 
Against this background, core inflation indicators suggested a continued deceleration in 
annual inflation, and the underlying trend of core indicators remained low .  
2. Annual inflation in food and non -alcoholic beverages rose by 0.52 points in March to 29.77%. 
Unprocessed food prices, led by fresh fruit an d vegetable prices , had a decisive role in this 
development. The processed food group posted moderate price increases while annual 
inflation in this group declined.   
3. Energy prices were up by  1.94% and annua l energy inflation rose by  1.84 points to  16.41%. 
This rise is mainly attributed to the rising fuel and bottled gas prices in tandem with exchange 
rates and the outlook for international oil prices.   
4. In March, a nnual core goods inflation dropped by 1.30 points to 19.92% . In this period, 
annual inflation decreased across all subgroups. The decline in durable goods prices was 
mainly driven by the fall in automobile prices while the new season price hikes in the clothing 
group remained below those of the pre vious year. Annual inflation in other core goods lost 
pace but still remained high. To sum up, the moderate course of core goods inflation is 
attributed to weak domestic demand.  
5. Services inflation rose month -on-month by 0.07 points to 1 5.21%. Annual inflation slightly 
decreased in restaurants -hotels, rents , and transportation services whereas it increased in 
the other services subgroup. The decline in annual inflation in transportations services was 
led by local passenger transportation.  Meanwhile, th e increase  in prices of maintenance -
repair services  as well as in prices of education services driven by private school fees 
constituted the most significant factor  affecting  other services inflation. Despite the slow 
course of domestic demand, services in flation remained elevated due to the cost factors as 
well as the backward -indexation behavior.   
 
2 Factors Affecting Inflation  
6. In the final quarter of 2018, GDP decreased by 3. 0% on an annual basis and by 2.4 % on  a 
quarterly basis. Thus, growth in 2018 was 2.6%. While the contraction in economic activity in 
the final quarter of 2018  was driven by domestic demand conditions, net e xports continued 
to underpin growth and the rebalancing  trend  in the Turkish economy became more 
apparent . 
7. Recently released data s how that the rebalancing trend  in the economy continues. Economic 
activity displays a slow pace due to tight financial conditions.   The rise in public expenditures, 
extended tax cuts on  durable goods and the partial rebound in loan volume underpinned a 
mod erate recovery in domestic demand in the first quarter. Accordingly, while a partial 
recovery is observed in economic activity compared to the previous quarter, the contribution 
of aggregate demand conditions to disinflation continues. The recent rise in  financial 
volatility and risk p remium indicators increase s the downside risks to the domestic demand 
outlook.  
8. Despite recent signs of a global slowdown, particularly for the EU, external demand remains 
relatively strong.  Firms’ orientation towards  external  markets amid sluggish domestic 
demand and their flexibility in market diversification stimulate exports of goods; lagged 
exchange rate effects, subdued loans and economic activity dampen import demand; and 
external balance continues to improve  rapidly on brisk tourism demand. Thus, the current 
account balance is expected to maintain its improving trend in the upcoming period .  
9. Labor market data confirm  the slowdown in economic activity.  The data for January 2019 
suggest that nonfarm employment was down across all sectors  compared to the previous 
period , construction in particular; while unemployment remained on the rise.    
Monetary Policy and Risks  
10. Economic activity has lost further momentum across the world, particularly in the EU, since 
the pr evious MPC meeting. The ongoing political uncertainty surrounding the EU, the current 
trade conflict between the US and China and geopolitical tensions have led to higher 
uncertainty over global economic policies and persistently fragile financial markets,  which 
feeds into the downside risks to global economic activity . 
11. Supply -side effects may pose upside risks to prices for international crude oil and other 
commodities in the upcoming period. If such risks materialize, the monetary policy response 
will ens ure to keep the possible  deterioration in inflation expectations and the pricing 
behavior  under control . 
12. The improvement in the risk appetite due to the postponed normalization of monetary policy 
across advanced economies has provided a partial  boost for portfolio flows to emerging 
economies.  
13. Developments in domestic demand conditions have led to some improvement in inflation 
indicators. However, higher food and import prices and the elevated course of inflation 
expectations point to continued r isks to price stability. Accordingly, the Committee has 
decided to maintain the tight monetary policy stance until the inflation outlook displays a 
significant improvement, and kept the one -week repo auction rate, i.e. the policy rate, 
unchanged at 24%.  
14. The Committee, at its meeting, evaluated the medium -term projections that are envisaged to 
be included in the April Inflation Report. Projections are based on an outlook in which the  
3 country risk premium that has increased in recent weeks due to geopolitic al factors and 
uncertainties would recover in response to a partial normalization of those factors as well as 
to a tight monetary policy stance and the inflation -focused macro -policy mix. In the event 
that the recovery of the risk premium and financial vol atility indicators are delayed, inflation 
and exchange rate expectations may hamper the disinflation process.    
15. The Central Bank will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability 
objective. Factors affecting inflation will b e closely monitored and monetary stance will be 
determined to keep inflation in line with the targeted path.  
16. The fiscal policy outlook that the monetary policy is based on incorporates a policy stance 
that focuses on price stability and macroeconomic rebalancing and that is coordinated with 
the monetary policy. Accordingly, the monetary policy stance assumes that administered 
price and tax adjustments are formulated in a way that will help reducing the backward 
indexation behavior. If the fiscal policy  significantly deviates from this framework leading to 
an adverse impact on the medium -term inflation outlook, the monetary policy stance may be 
revised.  
17. Collective efforts to turn the recently enhanced coordination between monetary and fiscal 
policies int o a sustained and systematic structure are expected to support the achievement 
of price stability. Moreover, continued structural steps focusing on reducing rigidity and 
volatility in inflation will contribute to price stability and therefore social welfar e. 
 
 
 