 
 
Decision of the Monetary Policy Committee  
September  12, 2019, No: 201 9 - 36 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Murat Uysal ( Governor ), Murat Çetinkaya, Ömer Duman, Uğur Namık Küçük, Oğuzhan Özbaş, Emrah 
Şener, Abdullah Yavaş . 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to reduce the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) from 19.75 percent to 16.50  percent.  
Recently released data indicate that moderate recovery in eco nomic activity continues. In the first half of 
the year, the contribution of net exports to economic growth continued , while investment demand 
remained weak and the contribution of private consumption gradually increased. Goods and services 
exports continu e to display an upward trend despite the weakening in the global economic outlook, 
indicating improved competitiveness. In particular, strong tourism revenues support the economic 
activity through direct and indirect channels. Leading  indicators point to a  partial  improvement in the 
sectoral diffusion of economic activity. Looking forward, net exports are expected to contribute to 
economic growth and the gradual recovery is likely to continue with the help of the disinflation trend and 
the improvement in fi nancial conditions. The composition of growth is having a positive impact on the 
external balance. Current account balance is expected to maintain its improving trend.  
Recently, advanced economy central banks have started to adopt more expansionary polic ies as global 
economic activity weakened and downside risks to inflation heightened. While these developments 
support the demand for emerging market assets and the risk appetite, rising protectionism and 
uncertainty regarding global economic policies are clo sely monitored in terms of their impact on both 
capital flows and international trade.     
Inflation outlook continued to improve. In addition to the stable course of the Turkish lira, improvement 
in inflation expectations and mild domestic demand conditions supported the disinflation in core 
indicators. In August, consumer inflation displayed a  significant fall with the contribution of core goods, 
energy and food groups. Domestic demand conditions and the level  of monetary tightness continue to 
support disinflation. Underlying trend indicators, supply side factors, and import prices lead to an 
improvement in the inflation outlook. In light of these developments, recent forecast revisions suggest 
that inflation is likely to materialize slightly below the projections of the July Inflation Report by the end 
of the year. Accordingly, considering all the factors affecting inflation outlook, the Committee decided to 
reduce the policy rate by 325 basis points. At this point, the current monetary policy stance , to a large 
part,  is considered to be consistent with the projected disinflation path.   
The Com mittee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is the key for achieving lower 
sovereign risk, lower long -term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery.  Keeping the disinflation 
process in track with the targeted path requires the continuation of a cautious monetary stance. In this 
respect, the extent of the monetary tightness will be determined by considering the indicators of the 
underlying inflation trend to ensure the continuation of the disinflation process. The Central Bank wi ll 
continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stability objectives.  
 
 
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Comm ittee Meeting will be released within five working days.  