Summary of the Monetary Policy
Committee Meeting
23 January 2019, No: 2019-04
Meeting Date: 16 January 2019

Inflation Developments
1.

In December, consumer prices decreased by 0.40 percent and annual inflation fell by 1.32
points to 20.30 percent. The largest contribution to the decline in inflation came from energy
and core goods groups. Oil prices and exchange rate developments favorably affected the
energy group, while core goods prices were affected by both exchange rate developments
and weaker domestic demand. Services inflation decreased across all subcategories. Against
this background, both the annual inflation and the underlying trend in core indicators
decelerated. In sum, consumer prices in December reflect the appreciation in the Turkish lira
as well as demand-side effects led by weaker economic activity.

2.

Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages maintains its elevated levels with 25.11
percent. As of December, annual food inflation is 27,09 percent in unprocessed food group
and 23,22 percent in processed food group.

3.

Energy prices were down by 3.12 percent in December and annual inflation in this group fell
by 4.53 points to 20.82 percent. This is mainly attributed to the decline in fuel prices driven
by the fall in international oil prices as well as the developments in the Turkish lira. Annual
inflation in the energy group is projected to decrease significantly in January mostly due to
the adjustments in electricity and natural gas prices as well as to the reductions in municipal
water prices in some cities.

4.

Annual core goods inflation dropped by 2.22 points to 24.67 percent in December. In this
period, durable goods prices decreased across all subcategories, most visibly in automobiles.
The deceleration in annual clothing and footwear inflation also continued in December due
to demand conditions. Although monthly price increases in other core goods significantly lost
pace, annual inflation in this group remained high. To sum up, the decline in core goods
inflation is attributed to the appreciation in the Turkish lira and the weaker domestic
demand.

5.

Services inflation decreased by 0.21 points to 14.46 percent. Annual inflation remained flat in
the communication group but declined in other subcategories. Cost-side factors led by food
and fuel prices continued to have a favorable effect on the catering and transportation
services inflation. The Committee noted that the deceleration in monthly inflation in the
rents group persisted. It also reiterated that the weakening domestic demand supported the
overall slowdown in services inflation.

1

Factors Affecting Inflation
6.

Recently released data show that the rebalancing trend in the economy has become more
noticeable. Industrial production decreased in the October-November period compared to
the third quarter of 2018, and current indicators signal that the weak course in the sector
also continued in December. Indicators for services and construction sectors also reveal that
the slowdown in economic activity has spread to all sectors. As a result of the domestic
demand-led sharp decline in imports coupled with robust exports of goods and strong
tourism demand, net exports continued to make a large contribution to quarterly and annual
growth in the final quarter of the year and partially prevented the economic activity from
weakening further.

7.

Slowdown in economic activity continues, partly due to tight financial conditions. Although
there has been some improvement in financial indicators recently, loan demand and supply
remain subdued. Leading indicators have yet to show signs of recovery in domestic demand.
The extended tax cuts for durable goods are likely to spur consumer demand in the first
quarter. However, the weak labor market will continue to curb aggregate demand.

8.

Despite recent signs of some slowdown in global growth, external demand maintains its
strength. Firms’ orientation towards external markets amid sluggish domestic demand and
their flexibility in market diversification stimulate exports of goods; and the external balance
continues to improve rapidly on brisk tourism demand. Thus, the current account balance is
expected to maintain its improving trend in the upcoming period.

9.

Labor market data confirm that the economy continues to slow down on the back of
domestic demand. In the September-November period, construction employment declined
further while industrial employment remained flat, and services employment picked up
slightly. Business activities with relatively stronger external trade links and the public sector
continued to make a positive contribution to employment.

Monetary Policy and Risks
10. Increased protectionist trends in international trade continue to keep the risks to the global
growth outlook alive by increasing uncertainties regarding global economic policies. The
global economic slowdown has been slightly more pronounced since the previous MPC
meeting. Therefore, the outlook for 2019 has been revised down for both advanced and
emerging economies.
11. The buoyant labor markets across advanced economies sustain the wages-backed upside
risks to global inflation. Nevertheless, given the weaker global growth otlook and the fall in oil
prices, the global inflation pressures are judged to be mild in the upcoming period. Still, the
Committee will continue to closely monitor the risks to global inflation arising from the high
volatility of energy prices and the wage inflation.
12. Expectations on the normalization of monetary policy stances in advanced economies have
moderated since the last MPC meeting. However, global financial risks and the uncertainty
over global economic policies are rather elevated for the coming months, upholding the
downside risks to portfolio flows to emerging economies.
13. While developments in import prices and domestic demand conditions have led to some
improvement in the inflation outlook, risks to price stability prevail. Elevated levels of
inflation and inflation expectations, and uncertainties over the course of cost factors
continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior in the coming period. Accordingly, the

2

Committee has decided to maintain the tight monetary policy stance until the inflation
outlook displays a significant improvement and kept the policy rate (one-week repo auction
rate) constant at 24 percent.
14. The Central Bank will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability
objective. Inflation expectations, pricing behavior, lagged impact of recent monetary policy
decisions, contribution of fiscal policy to rebalancing process, and other factors affecting
inflation will be closely monitored and, if needed, further monetary tightening will be
delivered.
15. The fiscal policy outlook that the monetary policy is based on incorporates a policy stance
that focuses on price stability and macroeconomic rebalancing and that is coordinated with
the monetary policy. Accordingly, the monetary policy stance assumes that administered
price and tax adjustments are formulated in a way that will help reducing the backward
indexation behavior. If the fiscal policy significantly deviates from this framework leading to
an adverse impact on the medium-term inflation outlook, the monetary policy stance may be
revised.
16. Collective efforts to turn the recently enhanced coordination between monetary and fiscal
policies into a sustained and systematic structure are expected to support the achievement
of price stability. Moreover, continued structural steps focusing on reducing rigidity and
volatility in inflation will contribute to price stability and therefore social welfare.

3

