 
 
Decision of the Monetary Policy Committee  
July 25 , 2019, No: 201 9 -29 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Murat Uysal (Governor), Ömer Duman, Uğur Namık Küçük , Emrah Şener, Abdullah Yavaş . 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to reduce the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) from 24 percent  to 19.75 percent . 
Recently released data indicate a moderate recovery in the economic activity. Goods and services expo rts 
continue to display an upward trend despite the weakening in the global economic outlook , indicating 
improved competitiveness. In particular, s trong tourism revenues support the economic activity through 
direct and indirect channels.  Looking forward , net exports are expected to contribute to the economic 
growth  and th e gradual recovery is likely to continue with the help of the disinflation trend and the partial 
improvement in financial conditions. The composition of growth is having a positive impact o n the 
external balance. Current account balance is expected to maintain its improving trend .  
Recently, weake r global economic activity and heightened downside risks to inflation have strengthened 
the possibility that advanced economy central banks will take expansionary monetary policy  steps . While 
these development s support the demand for emerging market assets  and the risk appetite , rising 
protectionism and uncertaint y regarding global economic polic ies are closely monitored  in terms of their 
impact on both capital flows and  international trade . 
Inflation outlook continue d to improve. In the second quarter, inflation displayed a significant fall with 
the contribution from a deceleration in unprocessed food and energy prices.  Domestic demand 
conditions  and the tight monetary policy continue to support disinflation.  Underlying trend indicators, 
supply side factors , and import prices lead to an improvement in the inflation outlook. In light of these 
developments, recent forecast  revisions suggest that inflation is likely to materialize slightly below the 
projections of the April Inflation Report  by the end of the year . Accordingly, considering all the factors 
affecting inflation outlook,  the Committee decided to reduce the policy rate by 425 basis points.  
The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is the key for achieving lower 
sovereign risk, lower long -term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery.  Keeping the disinflation 
process in track with the targeted pat h requires the continuation of a cautious monetary stance . In this 
respect, the extent of the monetary tightness will be determined by considering the indicators o f the 
underlying inflation trend  to ensur e the continuation of the disinflation process . The Central Bank will 
continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stability objective s.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working days.  
