 
1  
Summary of the Monetary Policy 
Committee Meeting  
19 December  2019, No.  2019-50  
Meeting Date: 12 December  2019  
Inflation Developments  
1. In November, consumer prices increased by 0.38% while annual inflation rose by 2.01 points 
to 10.56%. The rise in annual inflation was largely driven by the base effect recorded in the 
core goods group due to the temporary tax cuts in the same period of th e previous year. In 
this period, annual inflation increased in core goods, food, and energy groups while it 
remained relatively flat in the services group. Although annual inflation in core indicators was up due to the base effect, the B and C indices maintained their mild trend thanks to the stable course of the Turkish lira, the improvement in inflation expectations, and the developments in domestic demand conditions and producer prices.  
2. 
Annual inflation in the food and non- alcoholic beverages group rose by 1.04 points to 8.89% 
in November. This rise was primarily driven by the unprocessed food group . Unprocessed 
food prices displayed a favorable outlook in this period but annual inflation in this group increased due to the low base effect from last year. Meanwhile, the monthly rate of increase in processed food prices somewhat accelerated. This acceleration is also expected to continue in December, led by dairy products in line with the developments in purchasing prices of raw milk.
 
3. In November, energy pri ces were up by 0.55% while annual energy inflation increased by 
1.34 points to 7.34%. This increase was mainly due to the hikes in bottled gas and fuel prices driven by the rise in oil prices. It should be noted that annual inflation in the energy group 
will be in an upward trend in the next two months due to the low base effects.  
4. Annual core goods inflation surged by 4.65 points to 6.57% in this period due to the effect of 
the durable goods group in particular. Although durable goods prices remained flat i n 
November on the back of both the stable outlook in the Turkish lira and the moderate course 
of domestic demand conditions, annual inflation in this group posted a significant increase 
due to the low base effect stemming from the temporary tax cuts in the  same period of the 
previous year. While annual inflation in the clothing and footwear group remained almost 
flat at a low level, it slightly receded in the other core goods group. The stable course of the Turkish lira and the current trend in producer pri ces favorably affect the short -term inflation 
outlook in the core goods group.  
5. Services prices increased by 0.16% in November, and annual services inflation rose by 0.15 points to 12.16%. While annual inflation remained flat in rents, it declined in the re staurants-
hotels group and slightly increased in transport, communication and other services. Monthly price hikes in catering services in the restaurants- hotels group significantly slowed down in 
line with the moderate course of food prices. In this period , despite the curbing effects 
 
2 driven by domestic demand and Turkish lira, services inflation remained elevated due to the 
backward -indexation behavior, real unit labor costs, and the lagged price hikes in the sub -
items of administered transport services.  
6. The improvement in inflation expectations continues. The downtrend in 12 -month ahead 
inflation expectations persists while the distribution of expectations implies an increased consensus among survey participants in December, which indicates that uncertaint ies 
regarding the medium- term inflation outlook has significantly decreased.  
Factors Affecting Inflation   
7. Recent data indicate that moderate recovery in economic activity continues. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) rose by 0.9% in the third quarter of 2019, while the data adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects edged up by 0.4%. Main driver of quarterly growth proved to be consumption expenditures. Due to the robust increase in machinery -equipment investments, 
the downtrend in total investments came to a halt. Although the uptrend in exports of goods and services remained intact, the contribution of net exports to annual and quarterly growth was negative due to the rebound in imports.  
8. As risk premium, exchange rate volatility and uncertainties have declined , improved financial 
conditions and accelerated loans have supported domestic demand in the last quarter of the 
year. Despite the weakness in the labor market, private consumption has been increasing on the back of postponed demand. In addition, public expenditures continue to boost growth through the consumption channel.  
9. Sectoral diffusion of economic activity continues to improve . Indicators such as the CBRT 
Business Tendency Survey, PMI and sectoral confidence indices hint at an ongoing improvement in the manufacturing industry and services activities. Although investment remains weak, survey indicators show that in addition to large firms in the manufacturing 
industry which have higher investment appetite, investment tendency in small and medium-
sized fi rms have also started to recover after bottoming out. The Committee emphasized the 
importance of stable growth and demand for a sustainable improvement in investment and 
employment.  
10. While favorable effects of improved competitiveness prevail, weakening glo bal economic 
outlook tempers external demand. In addition to the EU, MENA countries also signaled for a 
partial slowdown in this period. While flexibility in market diversification and strong course in tourism support exports of goods and services, the rec overy in domestic demand stimulates 
imports. Against this background, in the last quarter of the year, it is expected that the contribution of net exports to economic growth will decline, and the current account balance, which has recently recorded signifi cant improvement, will maintain a moderate 
course with the contribution of supportive policy measures.  
11. Labor market data is relatively weak. Despite the rise in nonfarm employment in the third 
quarter, nonfarm unemployment rate continued to rise. Compared to the second quarter, 
industrial employment remained flat in the third quarter, and services employment 
increased, while the downtrend in the construction employment continued, although to a 
lesser extent. Leading indicators signal for a partial recovery in the labor market in the last 
quarter of the year.  
12. In sum, in the upcoming period, as the contribution of net exports to economic growth declines, economic recovery is expected to be sustained with the help of the ongoing disinflation process and improve ment in financial conditions.   
3 Monetary Policy and Risks  
13. Global economic activity continued to slow down in the third quarter of the year. Leading 
indicators for the next quarter indicate that the ongoing global slowdown in the manufacturing industry might have also fed into the services sector. These developments keep the downside risks to global economic activity alive. The resulting likely effects on domestic growth are monitored closely.  
14. Weak global economic activity depresses commodity prices and leads to a mild course in crude oil prices despite supply -side hurdles arising from geopolitical developments. 
Accordingly, global inflation rates remain flat.  
15. Weakness in global economic activity and low levels of global inflation strengthen expectations regard ing the continuation of expansionary monetary policies in advanced 
economies. The expectation that recently adopted accom modative stance of monetary 
policies in advanced economies, the US in particular, is likely to be maintained over a 
medium term horizon under current circumstances , and its implications for global financial 
conditions support the demand for emerging market assets and the risk appetite. 
Accordingly, amid recent positive expectations regarding a likely settlement of the trade tension betwee n the US and China, global risk appetite has increased slightly compared to 
the previous meeting period and portfolio flows towards emerging economies have presented a more favorable outlook. Meanwhile, rising protectionism and uncertainty regarding global economic policies are closely monitored in terms of their impact on both 
capital flows and international trade.  
16. Turkey’s risk premium continued to decline owing to a cautious monetary policy stance and improved macroeconomic indicators as well as the acco mmodative monetary policy outlook 
in advanced economies. The decline in the short -term exchange rate volatility has also 
become more pronounced following the previous meeting period. However, possible upside 
effects of global and geopolitical uncertainties on the medium -term inflation outlook 
through country risk premium and exchange rate volatility channels will continue to be 
monitored closely.  
17. The strong rate cuts since July and expectations of further rate cuts thereafter helped bring loan and deposit rates further down. Thus, TL -denominated commercial and consumer loan 
rates dropped significantly due also to the improvement in inflation expectations, while improved financing conditions and growing domestic demand helped total loans, consumer loans in particular, accelerate. Consumer loans have seen an upswing since early August 
while corporate loan growth gained pace with a l ag. This can be attributed to supply -side 
effects caused by expectations for the overall economic outlook as well as postponed  loan 
demand.  
18. The more flexible and effective use of required reserves as a countercyclical macroprudential 
tool in this period su pports credit growth and financial stability. In this context, firstly on 19 
August 2019, Turkish lira reserve requirement ratios and the remuneration rate on Turkish lira denominated required reserves were linked to annual growth rates of Turkish lira cas h 
credits. Moreover, on 9 December 2019, considering the level of rebalancing in the economy, a new reserve requirement practice was introduced to channel credit supply towards production -oriented sectors rather than consumption. Thus, long -term commercial  
loans that have a strong relation with production and investment and long -term mortgage 
loans that have a weak relation with imports will be encouraged. In the upcoming period, with the improvement in liquidity and capital adequacy ratios of the banking s ector, the fall  
4 in interest rates and adjustments in required reserves are expected to further support credit 
growth. In addition, NPLs and Stage 2 loans are monitored closely for any impact they might have on banks’ loan supply in the short term. Employme nt and income developments will 
determine if the recent rate cut -driven rebound in loan demand will persist. The pace, scope 
and sustainability of the normalization in credit conditions will be important for the outlook for economic activity.  
19. Inflation outlook continued to improve while inflation expectations displayed a wide -spread 
decline. Thanks to the stable course of the Turkish lira as well as the developments in 
domestic demand conditions and producer prices, core inflation indicators have display ed a 
mild trend. The improvement in macroeconomic indicators, inflation in particular, supports the fall in country risk premium and contributes to a benign outlook in cost factors. Underlying trend indicators, supply side factors and import prices lead to  an improvement in 
the inflation outlook. In light of these developments, recent forecasts suggest that inflation is likely to materialize close to the lower bound of the October Inflation Report projections for the end of the year, with risks around the disinflation path for 2020 being balanced. Accordingly, considering all the factors affecting inflation outlook, the Committee decided to reduce the policy rate by 200 basis points. At this point, the current monetary policy stance is considered to be consi stent with the projected disinflation path.  
20. The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is the key for achieving lower sovereign risk, lower long -term interest rates, and stronger economic 
recovery. Keeping the disinflation pro cess in track with the targeted path requires the 
continuation of a cautious monetary stance. In this respect, the extent of the monetary tightness will be determined by considering the indicators of the underlying inflation trend to ensure the continuatio n of the disinflation process. The Central Bank will continue to use all 
available instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stability objectives.  
21. The Committee emphasized the importance of sustaining the improvement in the country risk p remium for the price and financial stability objectives. In this context, in order to 
support the effectiveness of the monetary policy and minimize a likely inflation -growth 
trade -off, it will be crucial that macro -financial policies are determined with a focus on 
reducing financial volatility and risk premium, and that the predictability of the fiscal policy continues to be reinforced.  
22. The fiscal policy outlook that the monetary policy is based on incorporates a policy stance 
that focuses on price stabilit y and macroeconomic rebalancing and that is coordinated with 
the monetary policy. Accordingly, the monetary policy stance assumes that administered price and tax adjustments are formulated in a way that will help reduce the backward 
indexation behavior. If  the fiscal policy significantly deviates from this framework leading to 
an adverse impact on the medium- term inflation outlook, the monetary policy stance may be 
revised.  
23. Collective efforts to turn the recently enhanced coordination between monetary and f iscal 
policies into a sustained and systematic framework are expected to support the achievement of price stability. Moreover, continued structural steps focusing on reducing rigidity and volatility in inflation will contribute to price stability and there fore social welfare.  
24. It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its stance.  