 
Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
Hacı Bayram Mah. İstiklal Cad. No. 10 06050  
Ulus Altındağ Ankara +90 (312) 507 50 00 
www.tcmb.gov.tr  
Press Release on Additi onal Measures 
Taken against the Economic and 
Financial Impacts of the Coronavirus  
31 March  2020, No.  2020-21 
 
The measures taken to contain adverse effects of the global uncertainty led by the coronavirus 
(COVID -19) pandemic on the Turkish economy were announced on 17 March 2020 . For the same 
purpose, the CBRT introduces  the following additional measures to (i) strengthen the monetary 
transmission  mechanism by boosting the liquidity of the Government Domestic Debt Securities 
(GDDS) market , (ii) enhance banks’ flexibility in Turkish lira and foreign exchange liquidity 
management , and (iii) secure uninterrupted credit flow to the corporate sector, and broadly 
support the good s and services exporting firms, which are  affected by the pandemic , with an 
SME -focused approach :  
1. Outright purchase operation s under the Open Market Operations (OMO) portfolio , which 
are conducted within the limits identified at the Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy for 
2020 text , can  be carried out in a front -loaded manner  and these l imits may be revised 
depending on the market conditions . These operations are intended t o enhanc e the 
effectiveness of the monetary transmission mechanism  via increasing  the market depth,  
enabling  sound asset pricing and providing  banks with flexibility in liquidity management .  
 
2. For a temporary period, t he Primary Dealer banks, will be able to sell the GDDS  that they 
have bought from the Unemployment Insurance Fund to the CBRT  under the terms and 
limits set by the CBRT , or will be able to increase at certain ratios the liquidity facility  
offered under OMO in the scope of the Primary Dealership system . This aims at 
support ing financial stability by containing the likely impacts of the liquidity need of the 
Unemployment Insurance Fund on market functioning. These  GDDS purch ases will be  out 
of the scope of the limits set for the OMO portfolio. The related parties will be provided 
with d etailed  information and  criteria for these operations . 
 
3. Under the Turkish lira and foreign exchange operations conducted at the CBRT, a sset-
backed securities and mortgage -backed s ecurities have been  included in the collateral 
pool . Accept ing these securities as collateral will contribute to increasing the liquidity of 
similar securities issuances and to deepening the capital markets, and also enhance banks’ 
flexibility in Turkish lira and foreign exchange market liquidity management . Banks will be 
further informed about the criteria for securities to be a ccepted as collateral and  the 
limits for this facility . 
 
Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
Hacı Bayram Mah. İstiklal Cad. No. 10 06050  
Ulus Altındağ Ankara +90 (312) 507 50 00 
www.tcmb.gov.tr  
4. The limits for the targeted additional liquidity facilities offered to secure uninterrupted 
credit flow to the corporate sector will be increased . In addition to  the targeted liquidity 
facilities of repo auctions with maturities up to 91 days and Turkish lira currency swaps  
with a ma turity of one year, the CBRT will also hold Turkish lira currency swap auctions 
with a maturity of six months.  Through th ese swap auctions with six- month maturity , 
related banks will be provided with Turkish lira liquidity against US dollars, euros or gold , 
at an interest rate 125 basis points lower than the one -week repo rate , i.e. the CBRT’s 
policy rate .   
 
5. To facilitate g oods and services exporting firm s’ access to finance  and support sustainability 
of employment , Turkish lira- denominated rediscount credits for export and foreign 
exchange earning services will be extended. Turkish lir a-denominated rediscount  credits 
will be extended based on the following principles:  
a. A total limit of TRY 60 billion has been defin ed for the credits.  
b. Of this limit, TRY 20 billion has been allocated for credit utilization via Türk 
Eximbank, TRY 30 billion for credit utilization via public banks, and TRY 10 billion 
for credit utilization via other banks.  
c. Minimum 70% of the credits t o be extended via banks other than Eximbank will be 
allocated to SMEs.  
d. On a firm basis, the maximum amounts of credits have been set at TRY 25 million 
for SMEs and TRY 50 million for other firms . 
e. Firms that can obtain FX  rediscount credits, overseas contracting companies, and 
firms participating in international fairs will be able to benefit from this credit 
facility .  
f. The interest rate for these credits will be 150 ba sis points lower than the one -
week repo rate, i.e. the CBRT’s policy rate .  
g. The maximum commission rate of intermediary banks will be 150 basis points.  
h. The credits will have a maximum maturity of 360 days, and will be extended on 
condition that the export or foreign exchange earning services commitment as 
well as the employme nt level as of 1  March 2020 are maintained throughout  the 
credit period .  
 
 
Contact:   
For further information, you may send an e -mail to basin@tcmb.gov.tr.  
 
 