 
1  
Press Release on Summary of the 
Monetary Policy Committee Meeting  
1 October  2020 , No: 2020-59 
Meeting Date: 24 September  2020 
Inflation Developments  
1. In August, consumer prices rose  by 0.86% and annual inflation remained  flat at 11.77%. 
While annual inflation rose in core goods, energy and food groups, it remained unchanged  in 
the services group. Meanwhile, annual inflation in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco group 
declined significantly due to the high base from tobacco products . In this period, annual 
inflation rates and trends of core indicators registered a rise . 
2. Annual inflation in food and non -alcoholic beverages increase d by 0.78 points to 13.51% in 
August. The rise in a nnual unprocessed food inflation by 1.51 points to 15.36% was the main 
driver of this increase.  Seasonally adjusted data indicate  that rise in the prices of fresh fruits 
and vegetables  were prominent  in the unp rocessed food  group.  Annual inflation in the 
processed food group increased by 0.22 points to 11.86%. T his uptick was led by the bread 
and cereals group, while annual inflation in the other processed food group remained flat.    
3. Energy prices rose by 1.29% in August and the group’s annual inflation increased by 1.02 
points to 9.59%. In line with the increases in exchange rate s and international oil prices, the 
rise in fuel prices pushed  energy inflation up. Municipal water tariffs climbed further in 
August, another factor that negatively affected the  group ’s inflation . However, the high base 
driven by  the previous year’s adjustment to administered natural gas prices limited inflation 
in this group.  
4. Annual core goods inflation increased by 1.44 points to 10.02% in August due to exchange 
rate developments , as well as  stronger demand conditions on the back of  the credit impulse. 
Annual inflation in durable goods, which  is characterized by high exchange rate pass -through , 
climbed by 3.09 points to 13.07% , and leading indicators showed that high price hikes 
continued across subcategories in September. In August, prices of other core goods  posted  
an uptick , while seasonal discount s in the clothing and footwear group were  higher  
compared to the last year.  
5. Services prices rose by 1.14% in August and annual group inflation remained flat at 11.83%. 
While annual inflation increased in restaurants -hotels and communication services, it 
declined in other groups. The fall in the annual inflation of transport services was mainly 
driven by intercity passenger transportation . The restaurants -hotels group posted price hikes 
both in catering and , more significantly , in accommodation services.  While the increase in 
the prices of e xchange -rate-sensitive it ems in the other services group was notable, the 
monthly increase in educational  services remained limited. Meanwhile, the VAT cut on 
educational services is expected to have a favorable effect on prices in the upcoming period.  
 
2 6. Annual inflation in the alco hol-tobacco group dropped by 19.34 points to 2.44% in August. In 
this period, alcoholic beverage prices rose  by 2.58%, while tobacco prices, despite remaining 
flat, drove the annual inflation in this group significantly  down due to the high base. 
Meanwhile, in response to international prices and exchange rate developments, gold prices 
registered a monthly increase of 13.72%, thereby contributing to annual consumer inflation 
by 1.01 points.  
7. In September, inflation expectations continued to increase. The year -end inflation 
expectation rose by 64 basis points to 11.46%, and the 12-month- ahead inflation expectation  
increased by 45 basis points to 10.15%.  
Factors Affecting Inflation   
8. Economic activity is recovering markedly in the third quarter owing t o gradual steps towards 
normalization and the strong credit impulse. Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, the 
industrial production index picked up by 8.4% in July month -on-month and converged to the 
pre-pandemic level. Survey indicators and high -frequency data indicate that  economic 
activity  gained strength in August and September. T urnover indices showed that sectoral 
diffusion of the recovery  continues to widen, while economic activity remains relatively weak 
in some sectors  restrained by tourism and export  outlook . 
9. Recent monetary and fiscal measures that aim to contain negative effects of the pandemic 
on the Turkish economy contributed to financial stability and economic recovery by supporting the potential output of the economy . Nevertheless , tightening steps through 
liquidity management have been taken since August in order to contain the adverse effects of the rapid rebound in domestic demand, led by strong cre dit impulse,  on external balance 
and inflation . Accordingly, the normalization trend recently observed in commercial loans 
has started in consumer loans as well.  
10. Exports continue to recover across regions and sectors, and reached pre -pandemic levels in 
September  in seasonally and calendar adjusted terms . However, imports, which accelerated 
markedly in August, lost some pace in September and export/ import coverage ratio 
excluding gold remained quite high. The recent upturn in imports, which has resulted f rom 
deferred demand as well as pandemic -related liquidity and credit policies, is expected to 
moderate with the phasing out of these policy measures. Although tourism revenues declined due to the pandemic, easing of travel restrictions has started to contribute to a partial improvement. The recovery in exports of goods, relatively low levels of commodity prices and the level of the real exchange rate will support the current account balance in the upcoming periods.  The Committee underscored the importance o f the course of the current 
account balance in terms of a lasting recovery in economic activity and macrofinancial stability. Accordingly, effects of the recent measures on credit growth and composition and external balance are monitored closely.  
11. Adverse conditions in the labor market have started to subside in the June period, and non-
farm employment recorded an increase across sectors. Meanwhile, the labor force 
participation rate , which has recently displayed a significant downward trend , improved on 
the back of  economic recovery , and unemployment rates increased compared to the 
previous period. Leading indicators reveal that new job posts increased and employment 
opportunities continued to improve. The Committee assessed that subsidies provided through t he unemployment insurance fund and current transfers, short -time work allowance 
in particular, have played a critical role in limiting the income loss of households and 
maintaining employment.   
3 Monetary Policy and Risks  
12. While global economic activity has sh own signs of partial recovery in the third quarter 
following the normalization steps taken by several countries, uncertainties on global 
economic recovery remain high due to the continued spread of the pandemic and the 
possibility of a second wave.  Moreover, uncertainties remain regarding the possible effects 
of the outbreak and health measures on consumption habits and general spending behavior. In case normalization takes a long time or a second wave in the pandemic breaks out in the upcoming perio d, the nascent recovery in global economy may be interrupted and 
fluctuations in the global risk appetite may be observed.   
13. In the period following the August MPC meeting, crude oil prices receded slightly  and 
downside risks  on prices increased . The current level of oil prices is below the levels in the 
pre-pandemic period. On the other hand, there remain downside risks to commodity prices, 
particularly due to the uncertainty about the global economic activity, and global inflation 
rates are expected to be moderate throughout 2020.   
14. Advanced and emerging economies continue to maintain expansionary monetary and fiscal 
stances. While long -term interest rates remain at historic lows across advanced economies, 
both central bank statements and market expect ations suggest that the low -rate 
environment is likely to continue for a long period. The effectiveness of these policies for financial markets, growth and employment will depend on the course of the pandemic  in 
each country  and how much policy room each c ountry has . 
15. Portfolio inflows to emerging economies have increased since the previous MPC meeting 
due to improved risk sentiment. Inflows to bond markets  observed  since  June increased 
significantly in September, while flows to equity markets remained relatively weak and 
volatile. The Fed’s new policy framework and forward guidance reinforced the perception that the policy rate will remain low , which is considered to improve portfolio flows to 
emerging economies. However, ongoing uncert ainties over the global economic outlook 
might lead to fluctuations in the global risk appetite and portfolio flows to emerging economies. In fact, Turkey’s risk premium is fluctuating due to pandemic -driven global 
uncertainties and country -specific factor s. During this period marked with high uncertainties, 
the pandemic disease is closely monitored for its evolving global impact on capital flows, financial conditions, international trade and commodity prices.  Against this background, the 
CBRT will continue to monitor the effects of the pandemic on the Turkish economy and use 
the tools at its disposal in pursuit of its price stability and financial stability objectives.  
16. Monetary, financial and fiscal measures as well as the credit expansion, led  by state -own ed 
banks, made a significant contribution to the uninterrupted flow of credit to the real sector 
and the economic recovery process. Thus, the economy’s production potential was 
supported and economic activity has started to recover significantly since May.  The 
Committee, considering the rebound in the economy and its reflections into macro balances, 
decided to gradually  withdraw the pandemic -specific supportive macro -policy measures  
since August . 
17. Normalization of the measures taken to contain the adverse ef fects of the pandemic and the 
tightening steps in liquidity policies have led to an increase in loan and deposit rates, and 
loan growth has started to decelerate. Amid the policy normalization , the deceleration which 
had started in commercial loans, starte d to be observed in retail loans as well during this 
month. Loan growth and loan composition continue to be monitored closely for their impact 
on domestic and external balance.   
4 18. The Committee underlined the ongoing high inflation trend and evaluated the factors that 
interrupted the disinflation process. Pandemic -related supply -side inflationary factors were 
expected to gradually phase out during the normalization process and demand- driven 
disinflationary effects were expected to become more prevalent . Pandemic -driven supply -
side inflationary effects still persist, as normalization progresses gradually . Aggregate 
demand conditions continue to curb inflation in certain sectors, while price increases  are 
high for goods that are sensitive to financing conditio ns. Thus, as a result of fast economic 
recovery with strong credit momentum and financial market developments, inflation 
followed a higher -than -envisaged path . The ongoing rise in inflation expectations poses a risk  
to pricing behavior and medium -term infl ation outlook. The Committee assessed that the 
tightening steps taken since August should be reinforced in order to contain inflation expectations and risks to the inflation outlook. Accordingly, the Committee decided to increase the policy rate by 200 basis points to restore the disinflation process and support price stability.  
19. The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained  disinflation is a key factor for achieving 
lower sovereign risk, lower long -term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery. 
Keeping the disinflation process in track with the targeted path requires the continuation of a cautious monetary stance. In this respect, monetary stance will be determined by 
considering  the indicators of the underlying inflation trend to ensure the continuation of the 
disinflation process. The Central Bank will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit 
of the price stability and financial stability objectives . 
20. Fiscal policy actions, along with other monetary and financial measures taken during the 
pandemic, have supported the potential output of the economy by limiting the pandemic -
related economic risks and significantly contributed to the start of a recovery in economic 
activity. Sustaining the coordination between monetary and fiscal policies during the recovery process, and determining the macro policy mix in a way that will ensure the continuation of the disinflation process while supporting the current account balance are crucial for maintaining  healthy and stable growth. In the upcoming period, temporary and 
targeted fiscal and quasi- fiscal policy actions will be critical to support the sectors in which 
the recovery may take longer due to pandemic -related effects.   
21. It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its stance.  