 
 
Decision of the Monetary Policy Committee  
August 20 , 2020, No: 2020 -49 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Murat Uysal ( Governor ), Murat Çetinkaya, Ömer Duman, Uğur Namık Küçük, Oğuzhan Özbaş, Emrah 
Şener, Abdullah Yavaş . 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to keep the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) constant at 8.25  percent.  
While global economic activity has shown signs of partial recovery in the third qu arter following the 
normalization steps taken by several countries , uncertainties on global economic recovery remain high . 
Advanced and emerging economies continue to maintain expansionary monetary and fiscal stances . The 
pandemic disease is closely monitored for its evolving global impact on capital flows , financial conditions , 
international trade  and commodity prices .   
Economic recovery , which started  in May following gradual steps towards normalization , is gaining p ace. 
Recent monetary and fiscal measures that aim to contain negative effects of the pandemic on the Turkish 
economy  contribute d to financial stability and economic  recovery by supporting the potential output of 
the economy.  While commercial loans have recently started to normaliz e, consumer  loan s have  remain ed 
strong . The recent upturn in imports , which  has result ed from deferred demand as well as pandemic -
related liquidity and credit policies , is expected to moderate with the phasing out of these polic y 
measures . Although tourism revenues declined due to the pandemic , easing of travel restrictions has 
started to contribute to a partial improvement. T he recovery in exports of goods , relatively low levels of 
commodity prices and the level of the real exch ange rate will support the current account balance in the 
upcoming period s.  
Along with the pandemic -related rise in unit costs , exchange rate and credit developments restrain the 
demand -side disinflationary effects , and  the trends of core inflation indicators  have increased . As the 
normalization process continues, supply -side factors , which have prevailed recently  due to pandemic -
related restrictions , will phase  out. The gradual normalization of pandemic -specific financial measures  
and recent tighten ing steps taken in liquidity management  are judged to support macro financial stability . 
However, depending on the course of the pandemic,  uncertaint ies regarding domestic and external 
demand conditions  remain significant . Accordingly, the Committee decided  to keep  the policy rate  
unchanged , while  continu ing with  liquidity measures .  
The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is a key factor for achieving 
lower sovereign risk, lower long -term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery. Keeping the 
disinflation process in track with the targeted path requires the continuation of a cautious monetary 
stance. In this respect, monetary stance will be determined by considering the indicators of the underlying 
inflation trend to ensure the continuation of the disinflation process. The Central Bank will continue to 
use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stabil ity objectives.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working days.  
