 
 
Decision of the Monetary Policy Committee  
January  16, 2020, No: 2020 -01 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Murat Uysal ( Governor ), Murat Çetinkaya, Ömer Duman, Uğur Namık Küçük, Oğuzhan Özbaş, Emrah 
Şener, Abdullah Yavaş . 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to reduce the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) from 12 percent to 11.25  percent.  
Recent  data indicate that recovery in economic activity continue s. Sectoral diffusion of economic activity 
continues to improve.  However, investment demand remains weak. While favorable effects of improved 
competitiveness prevail, weakening global economic outlook tempers  external demand. As t he 
contribution of net exp orts to economic growth  declines, economic recovery is expected to  be sustained 
with the help of the ongoing disinflation process  and improvement in financial conditions. Current 
account balance , which has recently recorded significant  improvement,  is expected to maintain  a 
moderate  course  with the contribution of  supportive  policy measures.  
Weakness in global economic activity and low levels of global inflation strengthen expectations regarding 
the continuation of expansionary monetary policies  in advanced economies. Current global financial 
conditions  and the recent partial improvement in expectations regarding global trade support the 
demand for emerging market assets and the risk appetite . Nevertheless , rising protectionism , uncertainty 
regarding global economic policies  and geopolitical developments  are closely monitored for their impact 
on capital flows , international trade  and commodity prices .    
Inflation outlook continued to improve  and inflation expectations sustained  their wide -spread decline . 
The improvement in macroeconomic indicators, inflation in particular, support s the fall in country risk 
premium and helps contain  cost pressures . Developments in the e xchange rate, domestic demand 
conditions and producer prices  have contributed to a mild trend in  core inflation indicators. The course 
of inflation is considered to be broadly in line with the year -end inflation projection . Accordingly, 
considering all factors affecting the inflation outlook, the Committee decided to  make a measured cut in  
the policy rate . At this point, the current monetary policy stance  remains  consistent with t he projected 
disinflation path.   
The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is a key factor for achieving 
lower sovereign risk, lower long -term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery. Keeping the 
disinflation process in track with the targeted path requires the continuation of a cautious monetary 
stance. In this respect, monetary stance will be determined by considering the indicators of the underlying 
inflation trend to ensure the continuation of the disinflation process. The Central Bank will continue to 
use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stabil ity objectives.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working days.  
