Decision of the Monetary Policy Committee
April 22, 2020, No: 2020-23
Participating Committee Members
Murat Uysal (Governor), Murat Çetinkaya, Ömer Duman, Uğur Namık Küçük, Oğuzhan Özbaş, Emrah
Şener, Abdullah Yavaş.
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to reduce the policy rate (one-week repo
auction rate) from 9.75 percent to 8.75 percent.
As developments regarding the spread of the coronavirus substantially weaken global growth outlook,
central banks in advanced and emerging economies continue to take expansionary measures. The
pandemic disease is closely monitored for its evolving global impact on capital flows, financial conditions,
international trade and commodity prices.
Having displayed a strong upward trend in January and February, thanks to the improvement in financial
conditions, economic activity has started to weaken in mid-March due to the effects of the coronavirus
pandemic on external trade, tourism and domestic demand. In order to contain negative effects of the
pandemic on the Turkish economy, it is of crucial importance to ensure the healthy functioning of financial
markets, the credit channel and firms’ cash flows. In this respect, recent monetary and fiscal measures
will contribute to financial stability and post-pandemic recovery by supporting the potential output of the
economy. Current account balance, which recently recorded significant improvement, is expected to
follow a moderate course throughout the year due to the restraining effects of commodity prices and
imports.
Developments in inflation expectations, domestic demand conditions and producer prices have
contributed to a mild trend in core inflation indicators. Despite the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira
due to global developments, continued sharp decline in international commodity prices, especially crude
oil and metal prices, affects inflation outlook favorably. While the rise in unit costs resulting from declining
production and sales is closely monitored, the disinflationary effects of aggregate demand conditions are
estimated to have increased. In this respect, it is considered that risks on the year-end inflation projection
are on the downside. Accordingly, the Committee decided to make a 100 basis point cut in the policy rate.
The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is a key factor for achieving
lower sovereign risk, lower long-term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery. Keeping the
disinflation process in track with the targeted path requires the continuation of a cautious monetary
stance. In this respect, monetary stance will be determined by considering the indicators of the underlying
inflation trend to ensure the continuation of the disinflation process. The Central Bank will continue to
use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stability objectives.
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its stance.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working days.

