Press Release on Summary of the
Monetary Policy Committee Meeting
29 July 2020, No: 2020-40
Meeting Date: 23 July 2020

Inflation Developments
1.

In June, consumer prices increased by 1.13% and annual inflation rose by 1.23 points to
12.62%. In this period, annual inflation was down in processed food, but edged further up in
unprocessed food, keeping food inflation flat. Despite rising on the back of international
crude oil prices, energy inflation continued to restrain consumer inflation. Cumulative
exchange rate effects, the pandemic-driven increase in unit costs, and the rising demand for
certain sectors amid stronger credit supply drove core goods inflation higher. Meanwhile,
services inflation went up due to items affected by normalization process. Consequently, the
annual inflation rates and trends of core indicators increased.

2.

Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 0.06 points to 12.93%. The
soaring annual inflation in vegetables pushed annual unprocessed food inflation up by 2.15
points to 12.29%. On the other unprocessed food front, prices of pulses, dried fruits and nuts
and rice continued to climb in June, whereas prices of red meat saw a downtick after having
soared in recent months. Processed food prices posted a modest monthly increase and
annual processed food inflation fell by 2.09 points to 13.41% amid base effects.

3.

Energy prices increased by 2.62% in June and annual energy inflation rose by 3.89 points to
9.12%. The ongoing recovery in international oil prices was the main driver of the rise in
energy prices. There was also a notable increase in municipal water rates.

4.

Annual core goods inflation increased by 2.14 points to 11.39% in June. In this period, annual
inflation was up across all subcategories. Prices were driven higher by cumulative exchange
rate effects, pandemic-driven unit cost increases and the growing demand for certain
subcategories due to favorable credit conditions. Therefore, price hikes were more
significant in automobiles, white goods and other electrical and non-electrical appliances.
Meanwhile, price increases in clothing and footwear exceeded seasonal averages in June.

5.

Prices of services increased by 2.09% in June, and annual services inflation rose by 0.48
points to 11.76%, largely due to sectors facing capacity constraints amid gradual
normalization, with transport and restaurants-hotels in the lead. In fact, the largest increase
in annual inflation was recorded for transport. Other subcategories with higher annual
inflation included catering services, accommodation, and items of other services such as
package tours and personal grooming services. In this period, inflation remained low in
communication, while annual rent inflation continued to decline.

6.

Year-end and 12-month-ahead inflation expectations were up in July while 24-month-ahead
expectations remained flat.

1

Factors Affecting Inflation
7.

Recent data releases confirmed that economic activity started to bottom out in May.
Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, the industrial production index was up 17.6%
month-on-month. Likewise, turnover indices showed that the decline in non-industrial
sectors halted. However, as the March-April contraction was only partially compensated,
economic activity seems to have been weak in May.

8.

Economic recovery, which started in May following gradual steps towards normalization, is
gaining pace. Improving credit conditions support domestic demand. While expenditures by
cards for items with high sensitivity to financing conditions and deferred demand have
increased briskly, the consumption of electricity has also been increasing steadily. On the
other hand, the weak course continues in services groups hardest hit by the pandemic, such
as transportation, accommodation, and catering services.

9.

High-frequency data indicate that the recovery in the foreign trade volume continues, most
visibly in exports. The improvement in exports spreads across all regions and sectors.
Although tourism revenues declined due to the pandemic, easing travel restrictions are
expected to contribute to a partial improvement. Indeed, credit card spending by foreigners
and other high-frequency data carry signals, albeit still weak, for a recovery from trough in
tourism activity. The recovery in exports of goods and low levels of commodity prices will
support the current account balance in the upcoming periods. The Committee underscored
the importance of the course of the current account balance in terms of a lasting recovery in
economic activity and in terms of macrofinancial stability.

10. In light of currently available data, economic activity is expected to post a significant
improvement in the third quarter. Recent monetary and fiscal measures that aim to contain
negative effects of the pandemic on the Turkish economy contribute to financial stability and
economic recovery by supporting the potential output of the economy.
11. In the April period, employment losses continued to be registered across all sectors, the
services sector in particular, and unemployment rates rose. The decline in the labor force
participation rate continued to limit the rise in unemployment rates. Leading indicators
reveal that new job posts increased and employment opportunities improved partially thanks
to the improvement in economic activity. The Committee assessed that subsidies provided
through the unemployment insurance fund and current transfers, short-time work allowance
in particular, have played a critical role in limiting the income loss of households and
maintaining employment.

Monetary Policy and Risks
12. Developments regarding the spread of the coronavirus substantially weakened global growth
in the second quarter. While global economic activity has shown signs of partial recovery in
the third quarter following the normalization steps taken by several countries, uncertainties
on global economic recovery remain high due to the continued spread of the pandemic and
the likelihood of a second wave. Moreover, uncertainties remain regarding the possible
effects of the outbreak and health measures on consumption habits and general spending
behavior. If the normalization takes longer or a second wave of the pandemic strikes in the
period ahead, the nascent recovery in global economy may be interrupted and there may be
fluctuations in the global risk appetite.
13. In the period following the June MPC meeting, crude oil prices mildly increased due to the
recovering global activity as well as OPEC+ countries’ tapering of supply cuts as part of the
2

second phase of the agreement they reached in April. Still, the current level of oil prices is
below the levels in the pre-pandemic period. On the other hand, there remain downside
risks to commodity prices, particularly due to the uncertainty about the global economic
activity, and global inflation rates are expected to be moderate throughout 2020.
14. Advanced and emerging economies continue to take expansionary monetary and fiscal
measures. While long-term interest rates remain at historic lows across advanced
economies, both central bank statements and market expectations suggest that the low-rate
environment is likely to continue for a long period. The effectiveness of these policies for
financial markets, growth and employment will depend on the course of the pandemic in
each country and how much policy room each country has.
15. Although accommodative policy measures and steps towards normalization have driven the
risk appetite slightly higher recently, portfolio flows to emerging markets remain weak. The
ongoing uncertainties over the global economic outlook might lead to fluctuations in the
global risk appetite and portfolio flows to emerging economies. The negative effects of global
developments have somewhat eased in the recent period but global uncertainties remain
high. In this respect, the pandemic disease is closely monitored for its evolving global impact
on capital flows, financial conditions, international trade and commodity prices. The CBRT
will continue to monitor the effects of the pandemic on the Turkish economy and use the
tools at its disposal in pursuit of its price stability and financial stability objectives.
16. Monetary, financial and fiscal measures as well as the credit expansion, driven mostly by
state-owned banks, make a significant contribution to the uninterrupted flow of credit to the
real sector and the economic recovery process. Loan growth, which gained momentum
thanks to the guaranteed loans facility and predominantly in line with firms’ demand,
remains robust due to personal loan packages offered by state-owned banks following the
saturation of firms’ loan demand as well as due to the realization of consumers’ deferred
demand. Loan growth and loan composition are closely monitored for their impact on
domestic and external balance.
17. Despite the restraining effects of aggregate demand conditions, pandemic-related rise in unit
costs have led to an increase in the trends of core inflation indicators. International
commodity prices have continued to restrain consumer inflation, while food inflation has
risen due to seasonal and pandemic-related effects. As the normalization process continues,
supply-side factors, which have prevailed recently due to pandemic-related restrictions, will
phase out. Indeed, leading indicators show that monthly price increases have started to slow
down in services groups that have been subject to capacity constraints during the
normalization process. The Committee maintains the view that demand-driven disinflationary
effects will become more prevalent in the second half of the year, but risks to the end-year
projection are considered to be on the upside due to recent realizations in inflation.
Accordingly, considering all factors affecting the inflation outlook, the Committee decided to
keep the policy rate unchanged.
18. The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is a key factor for
achieving lower sovereign risk, lower long-term interest rates, and stronger economic
recovery. Keeping the disinflation process in track with the targeted path requires the
continuation of a cautious monetary stance. In this respect, monetary stance will be
determined by considering the indicators of the underlying inflation trend to ensure the
continuation of the disinflation process. The Central Bank will continue to use all available
instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stability objectives. Accordingly,

3

accommodative liquidity measures implemented since March may be revised in a gradual
manner, depending on how the normalization evolves.
19. Fiscal policy actions, along with other monetary and financial measures taken during the
pandemic, have supported the potential output of the economy by limiting the pandemicrelated economic risks and significantly contributed to the start of a recovery in economic
activity. Sustaining the coordination between monetary and fiscal policies during the
recovery process, and determining the macro policy mix in a way that will ensure the
continuation of the disinflation process while supporting the current account balance are
crucial for maintaining healthy and stable growth. In the upcoming period, temporary and
targeted fiscal and quasi-fiscal policy actions will be critical to support the sectors in which
the recovery may take longer due to pandemic-related effects.
20. It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise
its stance.

4

