 
1   
Press Release on the Summary of the 
Monetary Policy Committee Meeting  
23 January 2020 , No: 2020-04  
Meeting Date: 16 January  2020 
Inflation Developments   
1. In December, consumer prices increased by 0.74% while annual inflation rose by 1.28 points 
to 11.84%, slightly below the forecast presented in the October Inflation R eport.  In this 
period, while annual inflation rose across subgroups, the rise in the services group rem ained 
more limited. Energy inflation posted the most noticeable increase in December due to the low base effect from the same period last year. Food inflation remained on the rise driven by both unprocessed and processed food sub categories . Annual inflatio n in core goods 
increased due to cost factors as well as the low base effect from the same period last year. Against this background, although annual inflation in core indicators was slightly up, B and C indices maintained their mild trend.  
2. Annual inflatio n in the food and non- alcoholic beverages group rose by 2 .00 points to 10.89% 
in December . This rise was mainly driven by price movements in the processed food group.  
While price developments in dairy products were noticeable following the increases in purchasing prices of raw milk, the recent uptrend in bread and cereals prices continued. The rise in unprocessed food inflation in December was mainly driven by the other unprocessed food group, while inflation in fresh vegetables and fruits posted a limited  increase and 
remained low at the year -end. Leading indicators signal that despite significant increases in 
vegetable prices, unprocessed food inflation may slow down in January due to the base 
effect.  
3. Energy prices inched up by 0.16%, while annual energy inflation increased by 3.64 points to 10.98% due to base effects in December. This increase is attributed to the hikes in bottled gas and fuel prices driven by the rise in oil prices and the recent exchange rate developments. The sliding -scale tariff in fuel prices and the decline in municipal water prices 
limited a more adverse outlook in energy prices. It should be noted that annual inflation in the energy group will also rise significantly in January due to base effects . 
4. Annual core goods inflation increased by 0.91 points to 7.48% in December, partly due to the 
low base effect from the same period last year. In this period, annual inflation increased in 
clothing and durable goods but slightly decrease d in other core goods. The increase in 
durable goods prices is attributable to depreciation of the Turkish lira. Although clothing and 
footwear prices posted a more limited decline compared to seasonal averages in December, 
annual inflation in this group r emained significantly low. All in all, the trend of core goods 
inflation remained almost flat.  
5. Services prices increased by 0.37 % in Dec ember, and annual  services inflation rose by 0.14  
points to 12. 30%. Annual inflation increased slightly in communicatio n and other services, 
 
2 but declined in transport services and remained almost flat in restaurants -hotels services and 
rents . The underlying trend of services inflation also inched down. In th e upcoming  period, 
the real unit labor costs stemming from minimum wage developments, the tourism demand 
and the backward- indexation behavior  are envisaged  to shape  the outloo k for services  prices . 
6. The improvement in inflation expectations continues. The downtrend in the med ium-term 
inflation expectations continues to be widespread  and the distribution of expectations 
implies an increased consensus among survey participants, which indicates that uncertainties 
regarding the medium- term inflation outlook ha ve significantly decreased.  
 
Factors Affecting I nflation  
7. Recent data indicate that moderate recovery in economic activity continues.  Industrial 
production posted a month -on-month increase in November and remained on a path of 
recovery with a rise of 0.7% in  the October -November period  compared to the previous 
quarter. Underlying trend in industrial production is stronger after adjusting for temporary 
fluctuations in sectors with high historical volatility . Survey indicators and foreign trade data 
indicate that the uptrend in industrial production will continue in December  as well.  
8. The decline in  risk premium  and exchange rate volatility as well as the improvement in 
financial condit ions supp orted domestic demand considerably  in the last quarter . Despite the 
weakness in the labor market, private consumption has been increasing on the back of 
postponed demand. In addition, public expenditures continue d to boost growth through the 
consumption channel.  
9. Sectoral diffusion of econo mic activity continues to improve.  Survey i ndicators such as the 
CBRT Business Tendency Survey, PMI and sectoral confidence indices hint at an ongoing increase in the manufacturing industry and services activities. Although investment remain s 
weak, tendenc ies for investment and employment including that of small and medium -sized 
firms are recovering. The Committee emphasized the importance of stable growth and 
demand for a sustainable improvement in investment and employment.  
10. While favorable effects of improved competitiveness prevail, weakening global economic 
outlook tempers external demand. I n addition to the EU, signals for a slowdown in MENA 
countries  increased in  this period. While flexibility in market diversification and strong course 
in tourism support exports of goods and services, the recovery in domestic demand 
stimulates imports.  Against this background,  in the last quarter of the year, it is expected 
that the contribution of net exports to economic growth will decline, and the current 
accoun t balance, which has recently recorded a significant improvement, will maintain a 
moderate course with the contribution of supportive policy measures.  
11. The l abor market data for the October period  indicate an increase in nonfarm employment 
including the construction sector as well, and a decline in  the unemployment rate. Compared 
to the previous period , industrial and construction employment posted an upsurge, while the 
rise in services employment remained limited.  Leading indicators signal that the partial 
improvement in unemployment rates continues, while the weak ness  in the labor market 
prevails.  
12. In sum,  in the upcoming period, as the contribution of net exports to economic growth 
declines, economic recovery is expected to be sustained with the help of the ongoing disinflation process and improvement in financial conditions.   
3 Monetary Policy and Risks  
13. Global economic activity remain s weak in both advanced and emerging market economies. 
The Phase 1 trade deal between the US and China partially improved the expectations that 
global trade tensions could ease. Nevertheless, with high tariffs still in place, many issues unres olved and unc ertainty over the fulfillment of commitments, trade disputes keep the 
downside risks to global economic activity alive. The resulting likely effects on domestic growth are monitored closely.  
14. Crude oil prices have been more volatile and risen significantly since the previous MPC 
meeting due to recent geopolitical developments. However, sluggish global economic activity 
weighs on commodity prices. Thus, after an uptick in the fourth quarter, global headline 
inflation is expected to remain flat in 2020.  
15. Weakne ss in global economic activity and low levels of global inflation strengthen 
expectations regarding the continuation of expansionary monetary policies in advanced economies.  The expectation that recently adopted accommodative stance of monetary 
policies in  advanced economies, the US in particular, is likely to be maintained over a 
medium term horizon under current circumstances, and its implications for global financial 
conditions have paved  the way for expansionary policies in emerging market economies as 
well. Current global financial conditions and the recent partial improvement in expectations 
regarding global trade support the demand for emerging market assets and the risk appetite. Accordingly, portfolio flows towards emerging economies have presented a more favorable outlook compared to the previous meeting period. Nevertheless, rising protectionism, 
uncertainty regarding global economic policies and geopolitical developments are closely monitored for their impact on capital flows, international trade and commodity prices.  
16. Turkey’s country risk premium continued to decline owing to a cautious monetary policy 
stance and improved macroeconomic indicators as well as the accommodative monetary polic ies in advanced economies. However, upside risks  regarding global and geopolitical 
uncertainties on the medium- term inflation outlook through country risk premium and 
exchange rate volatility channels will continue to be monitored closely.  
17. The strong rate cuts since July, lower inflation expectations and improved banking liquidity helped bring loan and deposit rates further down. Thus, TL -denominated loans, consumer 
loans in particular, remained on the rise thanks to improved financing conditions and recovering  domestic demand. This rise can be attributed to supply -side effects caused by 
expectations for the overall economic outlook as well as postponed loan demand and loan 
restructuring.  
18. The more flexible and effective use of required reserves as a countercyclical macroprudential 
tool in this period supports credit  growth and financial stability. The aim of the reserve 
requirement practice introduced on 9 December 2019 was to channel credit supply towards production -oriented sectors rather than consumption and encourage the use of long -term 
commercial loans that hav e a strong relation with production and investment , and long -term 
mortgage loans that have a weak relation with imports. In the upcoming period, with the improvement in liquidity and capital adequacy ratios of the banking sector, the fall in interest rates  and adjustments in required reserves are expected to further support credit growth. In 
addition, NPLs and Stage 2 loans are monitored closely for any impact they might have on 
banks’ loan supply in the short term. Employment and income developments will determine the persistence of recent rate cut -driven rebound in loan demand. The pace, scope and  
4 sustainability of normalization in credit conditions will be important for the outlook for 
economic activity.  
19. Inflation outlook continued to improve and inflatio n expectations sustained their wide -
spread decline. The improvement in macroeconomic indicators, inflation in particular, supports the fall in country risk premium and helps contain cost pressures. Developments in the exchange rate, domestic demand conditi ons and producer prices have contributed to a 
mild trend in core inflation indicators. The course of inflation is considered to be broadly in 
line with the year -end inflation projection. Accordingly, considering all factors affecting the 
inflation outlook,  the Committee decided to make a measured cut in the policy rate. At this 
point, the current monetary policy stance remains consistent with the projected disinflation path.  
20. The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is a key f or 
achieving lower sovereign risk, lower long -term interest rates, and stronger economic 
recovery. Keeping the disinflation process in track with the targeted path requires the continuation of a cautious monetary stance. In this respect, monetary stance wi ll be 
determined by considering the indicators of the underlying inflation trend to ensure the 
continuation of the disinflation process. The Central Bank will continue to use all available 
instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stability objectives.  
21. The Committee emphasized the importance of sustaining the improvement in the country 
risk premium for the price and financial stability objectives. In this context, in order to 
support the effectiveness of the monetary policy and minimize a likely inflation -growth 
trade -off, it will be crucial that macro -financial policies are determined with a focus on 
reducing financial volatility and risk premium, and that the predictability of the fiscal policy 
continues to be reinforced.  
22. The fiscal polic y outlook that the monetary policy is based on incorporates a policy stance 
that focuses on price stability and macroeconomic rebalancing and that is coordinated with 
the monetary policy. Accordingly, the monetary policy stance assumes that administered 
price and tax adjustments are formulated in a way that will help reduce the backward 
indexation behavior. If the fiscal policy significantly deviates from this framework leading to 
an adverse impact on the medium- term inflation outlook, the monetary policy stance may be 
revised.  
23. Collective efforts to turn the recently enhanced coordination between monetary and fiscal policies into a sustained and systematic framework are expected to support the achievement of price stability. Moreover, continued structural st eps focusing on reducing rigidity and 
volatility in inflation will contribute to price stability and therefore social welfare.  
24. It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its stance.  
 