   
Decision of the Monetary Policy 
Committee  
24 December 2020  No: 2020-75 
 
 
Participating Committe e Members  
Naci Ağbal ( Governor ), Murat Çetinkaya, Ömer Duman, Uğur Namık Küçük, Oğuzhan Özbaş, 
Emrah Şener, Abdullah Yavaş.  
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to  increase the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) from 15 percent to 17 percent . 
Global economic activity data indicate that partial recovery since the third quarter  continues . 
However, despite the positive developments regarding the vaccine, uncertainties surrounding  the 
global economic activity prevail  due to the recent increase in Covid -19 cases.   
National income data and indicators for the last quarter point to a strong course in economic 
activity. However, restrictions introduced due to the increasing number of cases create 
uncertainties on the short -run outlook of economic activity, particularly the services sector. 
Besides, strengthening domestic demand, due to the cumulative effects of high credit growth 
during the pandemic, increases the current account deficit .  
Domestic demand conditions, cumulative cost effects, in particular the exchange ra te effects , 
increasing international food and other commodity prices and deterioration in inflation 
expectations continue to affect the pricing behavior and inflation outlook adversely . Accordingly, 
the MPC , taking into account the end -2021 forecast target, has decided to implement a strong 
monetary tightening , in order to eliminate risks to the inflation outlook, contain inflation 
expectations and restore the disinflation process  as soon as possible .  
In the forthcoming period, tight ness of  monetary policy stance will be decisively sustained until 
strong indicators point  to a permanent fall in inflation  in line with the targets and to price 
stability.   
The permanent establishment of a low inflation environment  will affect macroeconomic and 
financial  stability positively through the fall in country risk premium, the beginning of reverse 
currency substitution , accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and the perpetual decline in 
financing costs .  
In its decision -making process, the CBRT adopts a framework with a medium term perspective, 
based on analyzing all factors affecting inflation and the interaction between these factors. It 
should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to re vise its 
stance .  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working 
days . 
