 
 
Decision of the Monetary Policy Committee  
September 24 , 2020, No: 2020 -58 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Murat Uysal ( Governor ), Murat Çetinkaya, Uğur Namık Küçük, Oğuzhan Özbaş, Emrah Şener, Abdullah 
Yavaş . 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to increase  the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) from 8.25 percent  to 10.25  percent . 
While global economic activity has shown signs of partial recovery in the t hird quarter following the 
normalization steps taken by several countries, uncertainties on global economic recovery remain high. 
Advanced and emerging economies continue to maintain expansionary monetary and fiscal stances. The 
pandemic disease is closely  monitored for its evolving global impact on capital flows, financial conditions, 
international trade and commodity prices.  
Economic activity is recovering markedly  in the third quarter owing to  gradual steps towards 
normalization  and the strong credit imp ulse. Recent monetary and fiscal measures that aim to contain 
negative effects of the pandemic on the Turkish economy contributed to financial stability and economic 
recovery by supporting the potential output of the economy. The normalization trend recent ly observed 
in commercial loans has started in consumer loans as well. The recent upturn in imports, which has 
resulted from deferred demand as well as pandemic -related liquidity and credit policies, is expected to 
moderate with the phasing out of these po licy measures. Although tourism revenues declined due to the 
pandemic, easing of travel restrictions has started to contribute to a partial improvement. The recovery 
in exports of goods, relatively low levels of commodity prices and the level of the real e xchange rate will 
support the current account balance in the upcoming periods.  
Pandemic -related supply -side inflationary factors  were expected to gradually phase out during the 
normalization process and demand -driven disinflationary effects were expected to become more 
prevalent. Yet, as a result of fast economic recovery  with strong credit momentum, and financial market 
developments , inflation followed a higher -than -envisaged path . The Committee assessed that the 
tightening steps taken  since August should  be reinforced  in order to contain inflation expectations and 
risks to the inflation outlook. Accordingly, the Committee decided to increase the policy rate  by 200 basis  
points to restore the disinflation process and support price stability . 
The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is a key factor for achieving 
lower sovereign risk, lower long -term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery. Keeping the 
disinflation process in track with the targeted path requires the con tinuation of a cautious monetary 
stance. In this respect, monetary stance will be determined by considering the indicators of the underlying 
inflation trend to ensure the continuation of the disinflation process. The Central Bank will continue to 
use all a vailable instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stability objectives.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be re leased within five working days.  
