Decision of the Monetary Policy Committee
May 21, 2020, No: 2020-30
Participating Committee Members
Murat Uysal (Governor), Murat Çetinkaya, Ömer Duman, Uğur Namık Küçük, Oğuzhan Özbaş, Emrah
Şener, Abdullah Yavaş.
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to reduce the policy rate (one-week repo
auction rate) from 8.75 percent to 8.25 percent.
As developments regarding the spread of the coronavirus substantially weaken global growth outlook,
central banks in advanced and emerging economies continue to take expansionary measures. While
uncertainties on global economic recovery remain high, normalization steps taken by several countries
are being watched. The pandemic disease is closely monitored for its evolving global impact on capital
flows, financial conditions, international trade and commodity prices.
Having displayed a strong upward trend in January and February, thanks to the improvement in financial
conditions, economic activity has started to weaken in mid-March due to the effects of the coronavirus
pandemic on external trade, tourism and domestic demand. While the weakening in economic activity
became more pronounced in April, high-frequency indicators for the first half of May display signs of
bottoming-out following the steps taken towards partial normalization. In order to contain negative
effects of the pandemic on the Turkish economy, it is of crucial importance to ensure the healthy
functioning of financial markets, the credit channel and firms’ cash flows. In this respect, recent monetary
and fiscal measures will contribute to financial stability and post-pandemic recovery by supporting the
potential output of the economy. Despite the fall in exports and tourism revenues due to the pandemic,
current account balance is expected to follow a moderate course throughout the year due to the
restraining effects of commodity prices and imports.
Developments in inflation expectations and domestic demand conditions have contributed to a mild trend
in core inflation indicators. Despite the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira due to global developments,
international commodity prices, especially crude oil and metal prices, affect inflation outlook favorably.
While the rise in unit costs resulting from declining production and sales is closely monitored, the
disinflationary effects of aggregate demand conditions are estimated to have increased. Although
consumer inflation might follow a slightly higher course in the short-term due to seasonal and pandemicrelated effects on food prices, demand-driven disinflationary effects will be more prevalent in the second
half of the year. Accordingly, considering all factors affecting the inflation outlook, the Committee decided
to make a measured cut in the policy rate. Under the current monetary policy stance, inflation outlook is
considered to be in line with the year-end inflation projection.
The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is a key factor for achieving
lower sovereign risk, lower long-term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery. Keeping the
disinflation process in track with the targeted path requires the continuation of a cautious monetary
stance. In this respect, monetary stance will be determined by considering the indicators of the underlying
inflation trend to ensure the continuation of the disinflation process. The Central Bank will continue to
use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stability objectives.

It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its stance.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working days.

