Summary of the Monetary Policy
Committee Meeting
24 March 2020, No. 2020-19
Meeting Date: 17 March 2020

Inflation Developments
1.

In February, consumer prices rose by 0.35% and annual inflation increased by 0.22 points to
12.37%. The rise in annual inflation of both unprocessed and processed food groups
constituted the main factor that drove up consumer inflation. The fall in international oil
prices triggered a decrease in fuel prices, leading to a decline in annual energy inflation.
Services inflation slightly increased in February while core goods inflation remained mild.
Against this background, annual inflation in B and C indicators rose moderately but they
maintained a relatively flat trend.

2.

Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 1.54 points to 10.58% in
February. Led by fresh fruits-vegetables and red meat, unprocessed food prices surged on a
seasonal basis. Although annual inflation in this group was driven up by this surge, it
remained at historically low levels. The recent strong uptrend in processed food prices
somewhat weakened in February, and annual processed food inflation increased to a limited
extent. Bread and cereals continued to be the main driver of this increase, followed by fats
and oils as well as meat products.

3.

Energy prices dropped by 0.63% in February, and annual energy inflation decreased by 1.60
points to 15.54%. This was mainly driven by fuel prices that dropped due to the fall in
international oil prices notwithstanding the depreciation in the exchange rate. Leading
indicators for March signal that energy prices will decline on a monthly basis, and annual
energy inflation will significantly decrease due to base effects as well.

4.

In February, annual core goods inflation fell by 0.30 points to 7.05%. In this period, annual
inflation remained flat in clothing and footwear group while it slightly decreased in durable
goods and other core goods. Durable goods prices declined in February, with continued
impact of the VAT reduction in furniture. On the other hand, gold prices rose due to
exchange rate effects and international developments, keeping annual inflation in this group
elevated.

5.

Prices of services rose by 0.84% in February and annual services inflation increased by 0.29
points to 12.49%. In this period, annual inflation was up in transport, rents and other services
and flat in restaurants-hotels and communication. Among other services, the increases in
maintenance-repair, healthcare services and package tours stand out, all of which are highly
sensitive to exchange rate changes, while prices for recreation and culture services also saw a
notable increase. Services inflation will likely be determined by real unit labor costs and
backward indexation in the upcoming period, whereas, the measures taken to offset the

1

economic impact of the coronavirus outbreak and weakened demand conditions will put
some restraint on services inflation through related sectors.
6.

Inflation expectations remained moderate in March, and the distribution of expectations
pointed at a strengthened consensus among survey participants.

Factors Affecting Inflation
7.

GDP data for the fourth quarter of 2019 suggested that economic activity strengthened on
the back of domestic demand thanks to improving financial conditions and accelerating
loans. In this period, private consumption spending remained on the rise while public
spending continued to be supportive through the consumption channel. Investments
remained weak, some recovery notwithstanding. Meanwhile, despite continued increase in
exports, net exports made a negative contribution to annual and quarterly growth due to
rising imports.

8.

Current data suggest that economic activity remains robust for the January-February period,
and its sectoral diffusion continues to improve. The acceleration in loans buoyed up domestic
demand, while investments and employment showed signs of recovery but nevertheless
remained weak.

9.

Favorable effects of improved competitiveness and the partial recovery in global growth
helped exports remain on the rise through January and February. On the other hand, import
demand continued to surge due to the outlook in loans and domestic demand.

10. As of March, the outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic has begun to weigh on economic
activity through foreign trade, tourism and domestic demand channels. Contracted global
trade volume and restricted travel rights confine exports and transportation activities.
Moreover, possible effects of aggravated uncertainties and volatility in the financial markets
on the domestic demand are monitored closely. Despite the deceleration in exports and
tourism revenues, the sizeable decline in energy prices in the upcoming period is likely to
cause the current account balance to follow a mild course.
11. In the December period, the fall in unemployment rates continued with the decline in the
participation rate. The partial recovery in construction employment continued compared to
the previous period, whereas industrial employment receded, and services employment
remained flat. While leading indicators show that unemployment rates will decline further in
the first quarter, outlook in the labor market amid the limiting effects of the pandemic on
economic activity is closely monitored.

Monetary Policy and Risks
12. The fast spread of the pandemic on a global scale aggravates uncertainties and deteriorates
global growth prospects. Global monetary policies grew more supportive of economic activity
within the scope of emergency measures to minimize the financial and economic impacts of
the pandemic. While central banks in advanced and emerging economies have taken
coordinated expansionary measures, comprehensive sets of fiscal policy measures have been
introduced in many countries to support households and firms. Meanwhile, persisting
financial volatilities and measures to slowdown the spread of the disease weigh on aggregate
demand conditions on a global scale. Impacts of these factors on domestic growth, especially
through exports, tourism and related sectors are monitored closely. Monetary policy
instruments could be readjusted depending on the size and persistence of the effects of

2

measures, such as travel restrictions and uncertainties, on economic activity and labor
market through the domestic demand channel.
13. Along with the downturn in global economic activity that limits the demand for commodities,
increased volatility in financial markets led to plummeting prices in commodities, with crude
oil and metals in the lead. Moreover, supply-side effects driven by disagreements among oil
exporters regarding the amount of oil production keep crude oil prices subsided. Against this
background, and also with the weakening global growth outlook, global inflation rates are
expected to be lower in 2020.
14. Meanwhile, heightened uncertainties regarding the recent coronavirus outbreak and the
liquidity crunch caused a sharp downturn in global equity and bond yields as well as a decline
in risk appetite and the demand for emerging market financial assets. The evolving global
impact of the pandemic disease on capital flows, financial conditions, international trade and
commodity prices as well as policy actions taken towards limiting this impact are closely
monitored.
15. In the period preceding the coronavirus outbreak, Turkey’s macroeconomic indicators
improved significantly. A sustained fall in inflation and a sizable adjustment in the current
account were achieved. The recovery of economic activity became stronger along with the
improvement in financial conditions. In this period, foreign currency indebtedness of
nonfinancial firms decreased; liquidity and capital buffers of the banking sector
strengthened. The achievements of the rebalancing process have increased the resilience of
the Turkish economy against unfavorable shocks. Nevertheless, the increase in financial
volatility and expected slowdown in aggregate demand are closely monitored for their
impact on firms’ cash flows and balance sheets. Accordingly, necessary measures will
continue to be taken in coordination with other policies.
16. In order to contain negative effects of the coronavirus pandemic on the Turkish economy, it
is of crucial importance to ensure the healthy functioning of financial markets, the credit
channel and firms’ cash flows. Accordingly, with an aim to support financial stability, the
Central Bank implemented a comprehensive set of measures. With the objective of
containing possible adverse effects of the global uncertainty led by the coronavirus pandemic
on the Turkish economy, the CBRT has announced a series of measures aiming at (i)
enhancing predictability by providing banks with flexibility in Turkish lira and foreign
exchange liquidity management, (ii) offering targeted additional liquidity facilities to banks to
secure uninterrupted credit flow to the corporate sector, (iii) boosting cash flow of exporting
firms through arrangements on rediscount credits.
17. Additionally, considering that downside risks to the year-end inflation projection increased,
the Committee decided to cut the policy rate by 100 basis points. Developments in inflation
expectations, domestic demand conditions and producer prices have contributed to a mild
trend in core inflation indicators. Despite the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira due to
global developments, the sharp fall in international commodity prices, especially crude oil
and metal prices, affects inflation outlook favorably. Furthermore, due to the weakening in
global trade and measures such as travel restrictions, the disinflationary effect of aggregate
demand conditions has increased to some extent. The policy rate cut, along with other
measures taken, is expected to contribute to ensuring healthy functioning of financial
markets and supporting the cash flow of the corporate sector. The Central Bank will continue
to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stability
objectives.

3

18. The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is a key factor for
achieving lower sovereign risk, lower long-term interest rates, and stronger economic
recovery. Keeping the disinflation process in track with the targeted path requires the
continuation of a cautious monetary stance. In this respect, monetary stance will be
determined by considering the indicators of the underlying inflation trend to ensure the
continuation of the disinflation process.
19. The Committee assessed that it is essential to sustain the coordination between monetary
and fiscal policies to minimize the pandemic disease-related economic risks. The
multifaceted effects of the pandemic on the economy call for coordinated policy actions
aiming particularly at smoothing cash flows and stabilizing employment in order to minimize
the impact on firms and households. Therefore, it is considered to be of critical importance
that macro-scale monetary and fiscal policies are complemented with policy measures that
target the most-affected economic units also by considering sectoral interactions.
Meanwhile, ensuring that policy measures are designed in a targeted and temporary fashion
would support policy effectiveness.
20. It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise
its stance.

4

