 
1  
Press Release on Summary of the 
Monetary Policy Committee Meeting  
26 February  2020 , No. 2020-09  
Meeting Date: 19 Feb ruary 2020  
Inflation Developments  
1. In January, consumer prices rose by 1.35%, while annual inflation increased by 0.31 points to 
12.15%. Annual inflation declined across the main groups  excluding energy , and the surge  in 
energy inflation stemmed from the low base from the same period of the  previous year . In 
this period , B and C indicators recorded a relatively flat annual inflation, but a slight increase 
in trends.  
2. In January, annual inflation in food and non- alcoholic beverage s fell by 1.85 points to 9.04% . 
Led by fresh fruits and vegetables, unprocessed food prices surged on a seasonal basis, yet 
the group’s annual inflation dropped due to the high base , limiting  the food inflation. 
Meanwhile, processed food prices remained on an upward track in January, driven mainly by 
the bread -cereals and dairy products.  
3. Energy prices rose by 1.11% in January. Annual energy inflation rose by 6.16 points to 17.14% due to the low base effect led by the reduced prices in electricity, natural gas and municipal water in the same period of the previou s year. Monthly price increases were shaped by the 
rise in municipal water tariffs and increased fuel prices due to exchange rate developments notwithstanding the fall in international oil prices. Leading indicators for February signal that the group’s annual inflation will decline due to fuel prices. Meanwhile, in February, tobacco prices of the food and non -alcoholic beverages group registered a decline. 
4. Annual core goods inflation decreased by 0.13 points to 7.35% in January. In this period, annual inflation dropped in durable goods, rose  in clothing and footwear group and remained 
flat in other core goods. The VAT reduction in furnitu re products was largely transmitted into 
prices, pulling down the prices of durable goods in January . All in all, the underlying trend of 
core goods inflation remained mild.  
5. Services prices increased by 2.00% and annual services inflation inched down to 12.20% in 
January. In this period, annual inflation declined in rents, transport services and communica tion but crept up in restaurants -hotels and remained relatively flat in other 
services. According to the monthly price developments, price hikes seen in the other services 
group items that are inclined to backward -indexation, that reflect the exchange rate  effect, 
and whose prices are set according to the re -valuation rate were noteworthy. The underlying 
trend of services inflation increased slightly in this period.  
 
 
 
2 Factors Affecting Inflation  
6. Recent data indicate that recovery in economic activity continues. Industrial production 
posted a month -on-month surge in December and rose by 1.5% compared to the previous 
quarter. Survey indicators signal that the strong course in production will also co ntinue in 
January.  
7. The decline in risk premium, fading uncertainties and the rebound in loans support domestic 
demand, and the sectoral diffusion of economic activity continues  to improve . Despite signs 
of recovery due to falling loan rates and improving prospects for the overall economy, 
investment and employment remain weak. The Committee emphasized the importance of 
growth and demand stability for a sustainable improvement in investment  and employment.   
8. While favorable effects of improved competitiveness prevail, weakening global economic 
outlook tempers external demand. The European region’s PMI indicators have recently signaled a partial improvement in the growth outlook , with Germany  and the UK in the lead. 
In addition to this improvement in external demand, new market gains also affected exports 
positively. However, the re -emergence of downside risks to global growth due to the 
epidemic in China raises the uncertainties over the exte rnal demand outlook. Meanwhile, 
the recovery in domestic demand stimulates imports and the contribution of net exports to 
economic growth declines. Although the current account balance follows a moderate course, the effect of the developments in the demand  composition and the epidemic are monitored 
closely.  
9. The recovery in labor market continues  as the economic activity grows stronger. Compared 
to the previous period, non -agricultural employment increased driven by indust rial se ctor in 
November period and u nemployment rates continued to decrease. The leading indicators 
signal that the decline in unemployment  rates continued in the first quarter of 2020 as well.  
10. In sum,  as the contribution of net exports to economic growth declines, economic recovery is 
expected to  be sustained with the help of the ongoing disinflation process and  improvement 
in financial conditions.  
Monetary Policy and Risks  
11. Weakness in global economic activity continues both in advanced and emerging economies. Global economic activity p resents a favorable outlook on the back of the favorable 
developments towards settlement of trade tensions between the US and China, dissipating Brexit -related  uncertaint ies and the ongoing accom modative stance in global mo netary 
policies. Nevertheless, ag gravated geopolitical tensions in January, social unrest in some 
emerging markets, dr ought in the southern hemisphere and concerns over the epidemic that 
broke out in China keep downside risks to global economic activity in place. The likely impact of the listed factors on domestic growth are closely monitored.  
12. Weak global economic activit y coupled with more apparent downside risks repress 
commodity prices and lead to a mild course in oil prices despite supply -side problems 
stemming from geopolitical developments. In this respect, global inflation is expected to 
remain flat in 2020.  
13. Weaknes s in global economic activity and low levels of global inflation strengthen 
expectations regarding the continuation of expansionary monetary policies in advanced economies. On the other hand, recently elevated uncertainties regarding global economic outloo k lead to volatility in the demand for emerging market assets and the risk appetite.  
3 Rising protectionism, uncertain ty regarding global economic policies, geopolitical 
developments and the recent outbreak of an epidemic disease are closely monitored for 
their impact on capital flows, international trade and commodity prices.  
14. The cautious monetary policy stance, the improvement in macroeconomic indicators, and accommodative monetary policies in advanced economies have positively affected Turkey’s country ris k premium. However, upside risks to the medium- term inflation outlook that may 
be triggered by global and geopolitical uncertainties through the country risk premium and 
exchange rate volatility channels will continue to be monitored closely.  
15. The strong ra te cuts since July, lower inflation expectations and improved banking liquidity 
helped bring loan and deposit rates further down. Thus, TL -denominated loans, consumer 
loans in particular, remained on the rise thanks to improved financing conditions and 
recovering domestic demand. This rise can be attributed to supply -side effects caused by 
expectations for the overall economic outlook as well as postponed loan demand and loan restructuring.  Nevertheless, developments in credit growth and its composition are  closely 
monitored for their impact on external balance and inflation.  Going forward, sustaining a 
moderate course in the current account balance, which has recently recorded significant improvement, is considered as a crucial element of the macroeconomic policy mix. 
Accordingly, the Committee assessed that macroprudential measures addressing credit 
growth and its composition might be reviewed to safeguard the achievements in the current 
account balance for price stability and financial stability objectives.  
16. In the upcoming period, with the improvement in liquidity and capital adequacy ratios of the 
banking sector, the fall in interest rates and adjustments in required reserves are expected to 
further support credit growth. In addition, non- performing loans  and Stage 2 loans are 
monitored closely for any impact they might have on banks’ loan supply in the short term. Employment and income developments will determine the persistence of recent rate cut -
driven rebound in loan demand. The pace, scope and sustainability of normalization in credit conditions will be important for the outlook for economic activity.  
17. Inflation expectations remain favorable . Developments in inflation expectations, domestic 
demand conditions and producer prices have contributed to a mil d trend in core inflation 
indicators. The improvement in macroeconomic indicators, inflation in particular, supports the fall in country risk premium and helps contain cost pressures. The course of inflation is 
considered to be broadly in line with the yea r-end inflation projection. Accordingly, 
considering all factors affecting the inflation outlook, the Committee decided to make a more measured cut in the policy rate. At this point, the current monetary policy stance 
remains consistent with the projected disinflation path.   
18. The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is a key factor for achieving lower sovereign risk, lower long -term interest rates, and stronger economic 
recovery. Keeping the disinflation process on track with  the targeted path requires the 
continuation of a cautious monetary stance. In this respect, monetary stance will be determined by considering the indicators of the underlying inflation trend to ensure the continuation of the disinflation process. The Cent ral Bank will continue to use all available 
instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stability objectives.  In order to 
support the effectiveness of monetary policy and minimize a likely inflation -growth trade -off, 
it will be crucial that  macro -financial policies are determined with a focus on reducing 
financial volatility and risk premium, and that the predictability of fiscal policy continues to be reinforced.  
4 19. The fiscal policy outlook that the monetary policy is based on incorporates a policy stance 
that focuses on price stability and macroeconomic rebalancing and that is coordinated with the monetary policy. Accordingly, the monetary policy stance assumes that administered price and tax adjustments are formulated in a way that will help  reduce the backward-  
indexation behavior. If the fiscal policy significantly deviates from this framework leading to an adverse impact on the medium- term inflation outlook, the monetary policy stance may be 
revised.  
20. Collective efforts to turn the recently  enhanced coordination between monetary and fiscal 
policies into a sustained and systematic framework are expected to support the achievement of price stability. Moreover, continued structural steps focusing on reducing rigidity and volatility in inflation  will contribute to price stability and therefore social welfare.  
21. It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise 
its stance.  