 
 
Decision of the Monetary Policy Committee  
June  25, 2020, No: 2020 -35 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Murat Uysal ( Governor), Murat Çetinkaya, Ömer Duman, Uğur Namık Küçük, Oğuzhan Özbaş, Emrah 
Şener, Abdullah Yavaş.  
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to keep the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) constant at 8.25  percent.  
As d evelopments regarding the spread of the coronavirus substantially weaken ed global growth in the 
second quarter , normalization steps taken by several countries have contributed to a partial recovery. 
While uncertainties on global economic recovery remain high, central banks in advanced and emerging 
economies continue to  take expansio nary measures . The pandemic disease is closely monitored for its 
evolving global impact on capital flows, financial conditions, international trade  and commodity prices .   
While the weakening in economic activity became more pronounced in April, economic recovery has 
started  as of May following gradual steps towards normalization. In order to contain negative effects of 
the pandemic on the Turkish economy, it is of crucial importance to ensure the healthy functioning of 
financial markets, the credit channe l and firms’ cash flows. In this respect, recent monetary and fiscal 
measures contribute to  financial stability and economic  recovery by supporting the potential output of 
the economy.  Recently, exports and tourism revenues declined due to the pandemic . However, the 
recovery in exports of goods  with the ongoing normalization and low levels of commodity prices will 
support the current account balance in the upcoming periods .  
Despite the restraining effects of aggregate demand conditions, pandemic -related rise in unit costs have 
led to some increase in the trends of core inflation indicators. International commodity prices have 
continued to restrain consumer inflation, while fo od inflation has risen due to seasonal and pandemic -
related effects.  As the normalization process continues, supply -side factors , which have prevailed 
recently  due to pandemic -related restrictions , will phase  out and demand- driven disinflationary effects 
will become more prevalent in the second half of the year. Accordingly, considering all factors affecting 
the inflation outlook, the Committee decided to keep  the policy rate  unchanged.   
The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation proc ess is a key factor for achieving 
lower sovereign risk, lower long -term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery. Keeping the 
disinflation process in track with the targeted path requires the continuation of a cautious monetary stance. In this respec t, monetary stance will be determined by considering the indicators of the underlying 
inflation trend to ensure the continuation of the disinflation process. The Central Bank will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stability objectives.  
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working days.  
