 
1  
Press Release on Summary of the 
Monetary Policy Committee Meeting  
28 October 2020 , No: 2020-63 
Meeting Date:  22 October  2020 
Inflation Developments   
1. In September, consumer prices rose by 0.97% and annual inflation remained flat at 11.75%. 
In this period, a nnual inflation rose in the core goods and food groups, but declined in 
services and energy. In the core goods group, durable goods stood out with significant  price 
increases in recent months, while the clothing and footwear group witnessed a weaker 
course in prices compared to seasonal averages.  Seasonally adjusted  data pointed to a 
relatively mild increase in services  prices . Against this background,  core indicators registered 
an uptick in annual inflation  and maintained their high levels in trends, a lbeit some 
weakening.  
2. Annual inflation in food and non -alcoholic beverages increased by 1.44  points to 1 4.95% in 
September . Annual inflation rose both in the unprocessed and processed food groups by 2.11 
points and 0.93 points to 17.47% and to 12.79% , respectively . The pick-up in the 
unprocessed food inflation was driven by the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables. On the 
processed food group front , price hikes in the bread and cereals group and fats and oils 
group were prominent.  
3. Energy prices rose by 0.50% in September , but the group’s annual inflation fell by 2 .82 points 
to 6.77 %. The base effect in natural gas prices was the main driver of this decline in annual 
energy inflation. International oil prices posted a decline  in September , while the 
depreciation in the exchange rate inhibited a more favorable outlook in group inflation. 
Electricity prices used by the household s, industry and businesse s increase d starting from 
October.  
4. In September, prices of core goods rose by 2.18% and the group’s annual inflation increased 
by 1.66 points to 11.68%. This was led by the durable goods group, which saw a price hike of 
3.70% and an annual inflation reaching 17.38%. In durable goods with high exchange rate 
passthrough, strong demand conditions on the back of the credit impulse also proved 
notable in price increases. Other core goods also witnessed a similar course and prices rose 
by 1.54%. Meanwhile, prices of clothing and footwear diverged from the group , following a 
flat course. In this period, having displayed a weaker trend compared to seasonal averages , 
the clothing and footwear group saw a decline in annual inflation to 6.79%.  
5. Services prices rose by 0.58% in September and the group ’s annual inflatio n fell by 0.99 
points to 10.84%. A nnual inflation declined in transport services, restaurants -hotels and rent, 
but increased in communication and other services . Annual inflation in transport services 
registered a significant decline, which was driven by the bas e effect as well as the 
plum meting intercity bus fares. Meanwhile, the depreciating exchange rate continued to 
 
2 affect the other services group. The VAT arrangement in educational services had a favorable 
impact on inflation in this group.  
6. In Octo ber, short and medium -term  inflation expectations continued to increase. The year -
end inflation expectation rose by 30 basis points to 11.7 6%, and the 12 -month -ahead 
inflation expectation increased by 38 basis points to 10.5 3%. 
Factors Affecting Inflation   
7. The recovery in economic activity continues . The industrial production index picked up by 
3.4% in August month -on-month and exceeded the pre -pandemic level. High -frequency data 
point to  a sustained recovery in September and October. While economic activity continues 
to increase wi th a wide sectoral diffusion led by sectors sensitive to financing conditions, a 
relatively weak course persists in tourism and related sectors.  
8. Tightening steps through liquidity management have been taken since August in order to 
contain the adverse effe cts of the rapid rebound in domestic demand, led by strong credit 
impulse, on external balance and inflation.  Accordingly, following recent policy steps, the 
normalization trend observed in commercial and consumer loans has become more 
pronounced . Although  domestic demand is expected to slow down in the upcoming period 
with the stabilization of pandemic -specific supportive policies, the growth outlook for the 
whole year has improved significantly . 
9. Exports continue to recover on the back of the compet itiveness  gains as well as the rebound 
in global demand. Meanw hile, the expected moderation in imports has started with the 
phasing out of pandemic -related supportive policies . The export -to-import coverage ratio 
excluding gold remains high. The Committee considers  that the additional import demand 
led by the strong credit impulse will lose pace in the period ahead and the balancing effects 
of the real exchange rate will become more apparent. Accordingly, the strong recovery in 
exports of goods, relatively low levels of commodity prices and the level of the real exchange 
rate will support the current account balance in the upcoming periods . The Committee 
underscored the importance of the course of the current account balance in terms of a 
lasting recovery in  economic activity and macrofinancial stability.  
10. The recovery in economic activity has a positive effect on the labor market. In the July 
period, non -farm employment recorded an increase across sectors . Mean while , only half of 
the employment loss in the se cond quarter has been compensated for in seasonally adjusted  
terms . In this period, the labor force participation rate posted an increase on the back of 
economic recovery, and unemployment rates receded. Leading indicators reveal that new 
job posts increas ed and employment opportunities continued to improve.   
Monetary Policy and Risks  
11. While global economic activity has shown signs of partial recovery in the third quarter 
following the normalization steps taken by several countries, uncertainties on global 
economic recovery persist due to the continued spread of the pandemic . The recently 
elevated  pandemic -related restrictions in the European countries keep downside risks to 
external demand and export outlook in place. Moreover, uncertainties remain regarding the 
possible effects of the pandemic and health measures on consumption habits and general 
spending behavior. In case normalization takes a long time or a second wave in the pandemic 
breaks out in the upcoming perio d, the nascent recovery in global economy may be 
interrupted and fluctuations in the global risk appetite may be observed.    
3 12. In tandem with the subsided global economic activity, crude oil prices remained flat since the 
previous MPC meeting. The current lev el of oil prices is below the levels of the pre -pandemic 
period. On the other hand, there remain downside risks to commodity prices, particularly 
due to the uncertainty about the global economic activity, and global inflation rates are 
expected to be moder ate in the upcoming period.  
13. Advanced and emerging economies maintain their expansionary monetary and fiscal stances.  
While long -term interest rates remain at historic lows across advanced economies, both 
central bank statements and market expectations sugg est that the low -rate environment is 
likely to continue for a long period. The effectiveness of these policies for financial markets, 
growth and employment will depend on the course of the pandemic in each country and 
how much policy room each country has.  
14. Portfolio inflows to emerging economies have increased since the previous MPC meeting 
due to improved risk sentiment . However, excluding China, inflows to bond markets  
continued with a limited pace, while those to equity markets remained relatively weak. 
Reinforced perceptions that policy rates will remain low in advanced economies and possible 
incentive packages are considered to improve portfolio flows to emerging economies. 
However, ongoing uncertainties  over the global economic outlook might lead to fluctuations 
in the global risk appetite and portfolio flows to emerging economies. In fact, Turkey’s risk 
premium is fluctuating due to pandemic -driven global uncertainties and country -specific 
factors. Duri ng this period marked with high uncertainties,  the pandemic disease is closely 
monitored for its evolving global impact on capital flows, financial conditions, international 
trade and commodity prices. Against this background, the CBRT will continue to mon itor the 
effects of the pandemic on the Turkish economy and use the tools at its disposal in pursuit of 
its price stability and financial stability objectives.  
15. The recovery stimulated by steps for gradual normalization in economic activity, which 
started i n May, gained strength owing to supportive policies. Rapid credit growth 
contributed signific antly to the economic recovery , and economic activity exceeded the  pre-
pandemic levels. The Committee, considering the rebound in the economy and its reflections 
to macro balances, decided to gradually withdraw the pandemic -specific supportive macro -
policy measures since August.  The gradual increase in the weighted average funding cost  
achieved by the  steps for tightening in the monetary policy and the liquidity man agement 
and the balancing in the accomodative stance of state banks had fast and strong 
repercussi ons in loan rates.  The rise  in consumer loan rates proved more noticeable, while 
the normalization trend in commercial and consumer loans has recently become more 
pronounced. Presently, curbing risks to the inflation outlook is critical to the maintenance of 
a healthy and stable growth. Accordingly, the CBRT strengthened its tightening efforts as of 
August gradually  with a view to  containing inflation expectati ons, restoring the disinflation 
process and supporting price stability . 
16. As a result of fast economic recovery with strong credit momentum , and financial market 
developments, inflation followed a higher -than -envisaged path. A significant tightening in 
finan cial conditions has been achieved, following the monetary policy and liquidity 
management steps taken to contain inflation expectations and risks to the inflation outlook. 
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged, while enha ncing 
flexibility in liquidity management and continuing with liquidity measures until inflation 
outlook displays a significant improvement . Tightening in financial conditions along with the 
deceleration in loan growth and the sustained uptrend in the weig hted average funding cost 
in the upcoming period will have a positive effect on the inflation outlook. Effects of the  
4 additional tightening  steps  on pricing behavior, expectations and the inflation outlook will 
continue to be closely monitored .  
17. The Commit tee assesses that restoring the disinflation process is a key factor for achieving 
lower sovereign risk, lower long -term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery. 
Keeping the disinflation process in track with the targeted path requires the continuat ion of 
a cautious monetary stance. In this respect, monetary stance will be determined by 
considering the indicators of the underlying inflation trend to ensure the continuation of the 
disinflation process. The Central Bank will continue to use all availab le instruments in pursuit 
of the price stability and financial stability objectives.  
18. Fiscal policy actions, along with other monetary and financial measures taken during the 
pandemic, have supported the potential output of the economy by limiting the pande mic-
related economic risks and significantly contributed to the onset of a recovery in economic 
activity.  During the stabilization of the economy the determination of the macro policy mix in 
a way that will ensure the continuation of the disinflation process with a strong coordination 
among monetary, credit and fiscal policies is crucial for maintaining healthy and stable 
growth  by curbing macrofinancial risks .  
19. It shou ld be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise 
its stance.  