Decision of the Monetary Policy Committee
October 22, 2020, No: 2020-61
Participating Committee Members
Murat Uysal (Governor), Murat Çetinkaya, Ömer Duman, Uğur Namık Küçük, Oğuzhan Özbaş, Emrah
Şener, Abdullah Yavaş.
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to:
-

keep the policy rate (one-week repo auction rate) constant at 10.25 percent, and

-

adjust the monetary policy operational framework and set the margin between the CBRT Late
Liquidity Window lending rate and overnight lending rate as 300 basis points.

While global economic activity has shown signs of partial recovery in the third quarter following the
normalization steps taken by several countries, uncertainties on global economic recovery persist.
Advanced and emerging economies continue to maintain expansionary monetary and fiscal stances. The
pandemic disease is closely monitored for its evolving global impact on capital flows, financial conditions,
international trade and commodity prices.
The recovery in economic activity continues. Following recent policy steps, the normalization trend
observed in commercial and consumer loans has become more pronounced. The expected moderation
in imports has started with the phasing out of pandemic-related supportive policies. The strong recovery
in exports of goods, relatively low levels of commodity prices and the level of the real exchange rate will
support the current account balance in the upcoming periods.
As a result of fast economic recovery with strong credit momentum, and financial market developments,
inflation followed a higher-than-envisaged path. A significant tightening in financial conditions has been
achieved, following the monetary policy and liquidity management steps taken to contain inflation
expectations and risks to the inflation outlook. Accordingly, the Committee has decided to keep the policy
rate unchanged, while enhancing flexibility in liquidity management and continuing with liquidity
measures until inflation outlook displays a significant improvement.
The Committee assesses that restoring the disinflation process is a key factor for achieving lower
sovereign risk, lower long-term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery. Keeping the disinflation
process in track with the targeted path requires the continuation of a cautious monetary stance. In this
respect, monetary stance will be determined by considering the indicators of the underlying inflation
trend to ensure the continuation of the disinflation process. The Central Bank will continue to use all
available instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stability objectives.
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its stance.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working days.

