 
1  
Press Release on Summary of the 
Monetary Policy Committee Meeting  
2 July 2020 , No: 2020-36 
Meeting Date : 25 June  2020 
Inflation Developments  
1. In May, consumer prices increased by 1.36% and annual inflation rose by 0.45 points to 
11.39%. In this period, as underlined  in the May MPC meeting summary, food inflation 
increased due to unprocessed food prices. Although energy inflation increased on the  back 
of international oil prices, it continued to restrain consumer inflation. While the depreciation 
in the Turkish lira had reflections on the core goods, primarily the durable goods inflation, 
the slowdown in services inflation continued, led by items that experienced a disruption in 
activity due to the pandemic . Consequently,  the trends of core indicators posted a slight 
uptick.  
2. Annual inflation in food and  non-alcoholic beverages rose by 1.59% to 12.87% in May. This 
rise was mainly dr iven by the unprocessed food group with an annual inflation that increased 
by 4.91 points. The fall in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables  that remained relatively 
limited compared to previous years due to period -specific developments  and the price hike s 
in eggs and pulses that are highly sensitive to the exchange rate were  the main factor s that 
had an adverse impact on the unprocessed food inflation.  While monthly inflation in the 
processed food group decelerated slightly, annual inflation declined sign ificantly on the back 
of the base effect. Meanwhile, leading indica tors suggest that annual unprocessed food 
inflation may also rise in June.  
3. Energy prices increased by 2.13% in May and annual energy inflation rose by 1.93 points to 
5.23%. The recovery in international oil prices along with the depreciation of the Turkish lira 
determined the rise in energy prices. Leading indicators suggest that  annual energy inflation 
may rise in June.  
4. Annual core goods inflation increased by 1.38 points to 9.26% in May. In this period, both 
durable consumption goods and clothing and footwear prices posted significant increases. 
While in the durable goods group  increases in the prices of automobiles and white goods 
driven by the cumulative depreciation of the Turkish lira were noteworthy, the clothing and 
footwear group saw a price increase above seasonal averages.  
5. Services prices increased by 0.73% in May, and annual services inflation edged down by 0.48 
points to 11.28%. The limiting effects of the pandemic on services prices started to be felt in 
this period. As a matter of fact, while the most noticeable decline in annual inflation was 
seen in restaurants -hotels, the operations of which were interrupted significantly, annual 
inflation in other services and rents also posted a decline. The capacity limitations in 
transport services applied as part of gradual normal ization steps led to an increase in annual 
transport inflation through the channel of unit costs.  
 
2 6. While inflation expectations for the year -end increased slightly, those for the next 12 months 
declined in June.  
Factors Afecting Inflation  
7. The weakening i n economic activity became more pronounced in April and spread across 
sectors. The industrial production, adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, contracted by 
30.4% month -on-month in April. The decline in the production of the main exporting sectors, 
primarily motor vehicles, wearing apparel and textiles, became more discernible. In the same 
period, while tourism revenues almost came to a halt due to travel restrictions, services 
sectors, in particular trade, accommodation -food and transport -storage se rvices,  
experienced a drastic deceleration  due to the measures taken against the pandemic.     
8. Economic recovery has started as of May following gradual steps towards normalization. The 
relief of the restrictions on movement and improving credit conditions  support domestic 
demand. While expenditures by cards for items with high sensitivity to financing conditions 
and deferred demand have soared, the consumption of electricity has also been increasing 
steadily. In the meantime, exports show an improvement ac ross foreign trade partners, 
while the demand for imports has been increasing in line with the domestic demand.  
9. Exports and tourism revenues declined on account of the deterioration in the global growth 
outlook and travel restrictions due to the pandemic.  However, the recovery in exports of 
goods with the ongoing normalization and low levels of commodity prices will support the 
current account balance in the upcoming periods. The Committee underscored the 
importance of the course of the current account bal ance in terms of a lasting recovery in 
economic activity and in terms of macrofinancial stability.  
10. In order to contain negative effects of the pandemic on the Turkish economy, it is of crucial 
importance to ensure the healthy functioning of financial marke ts, the credit channel and 
firms’ cash flows. In this respect, the recent monetary and fiscal measures contribute to 
financial stability and economic recovery by supporting the potential output of the economy. 
The pace of the recovery in economic activity will depend on the course of the normalization 
process in Turkey as well as in the global economy.  
11. The slowdown in economic activity also had implications on the labor market data. The non -
farm employment in March period decreased by 4.3% compared to Febru ary period, more 
apparently in the construction and services sectors. However, the increase in the 
unemployment rate remained relatively limited on the back of the decline in the labor force 
participation rate. Leading indicators reveal that new job posts increased and employment 
opportunities improved partially thanks to the improvement in economic activity. The 
Committee assessed that subsidies provided through the unemployment insurance fund and 
current transfers, short -time work allowance in particular,  have played a critical role in 
limiting the income loss of households and maintaining employment.  
Monetary Policy and Risks  
12. As developments regarding the spread of the coronavirus substantially weakened global 
growth in the second quarter, normalization s teps taken by several countries have 
contributed to a partial recovery.  Nevertheless, due to the continued  spread of the 
pandemic primarily in the southern hemisphere  and the likelihood of a second wave , 
uncerta inties on global economic recovery remain high.  Uncertainties remain regarding the 
possible effects of the outbreak and health measures on consumption habits and general  
3 spending behavior. A prolonged normalization phase could translate into a much weaker 
global and domestic growth outlook, callin g for additional response measures.  
13. In the period following the MPC meeting, oil prices posted a recovery over the agreement of 
OPEC+ countries on supply cut and the expectations that the worst is over on the demand 
side. However, there remain downside risks to commodity prices, particularly due to the 
uncertainty about the global economic activity , and global inflation rates are expected to be 
moderate throughout 2020.  
14. Central banks in advanced and emerging economies continue to take expansionary 
measur es. Long -term interest rates fell to historic lows across advanced economies, and 
both central bank statements and market expectations suggest that the low -rate 
environment is likely to continue  for a long period . The effectiveness of these policies for 
financial markets, growth and employment will depend on the course of the pandemic in 
each country and how much policy room each country has.  
15. Accommodative policy measures and steps towards normalization have driven the risk 
appetite slightly higher, slowi ng down portfolio outflows from emerging markets. Following 
the normalization steps , and also thanks to recent monetary and financial measures, the 
adverse effects of global developments on Turkey’s risk premium and exchange rate volatility 
somewhat  eased.  However, the ongoing uncertainties over the global economic outlook and 
effectiveness of policy measures might lead to fluctuations in the global risk appetite and 
portfolio flows to emerging economies. As uncertainty still reigns , the pandemic disease is  
closely monitored for its evolving global impact on capital flows, financial conditions, 
international trade and commodity prices. Thus, the CBRT will continue to monitor the 
effects of the pandemic on the Turkish economy and use the tools at its disposal  in pursuit of 
its price stability and financial stability objectives.  
16. Monetary, financial and fiscal measures introduced to address the pandemic, as well as the 
expansion of loan supply, mostly by state -owned banks, have mitigated downside risks to 
loan g rowth and contributed to the uninterrupted flow of credit to the real sector. The 
momentum of loan gro wth remain s robust thanks to guaranteed loans facility, as well as 
supporting packages for construction, tourism and domestic manufacturing sectors. 
Guara nteed loans, led by state -owned banks in particular, propped up commercial and 
personal loan supply and helped bring interest rates further down, thus alleviating the 
negative effects of the pandemic on income and cash flows of economic units. Recently 
announced personal loan packages also helped boost the demand for housing loans.  
17. Despite the restraining effects of aggregate demand conditions, the pandemic -related rise in 
unit costs have led to some increase in the trends of core inflation indicators. International 
commodity prices have continued to restrain consumer inflation, while food inflation has 
risen due to seasonal and pandemic -related effects.  As the normalization process continues, 
supply -side factors, which have prevailed recently due to pa ndemic -related restrictions, will 
phase out and demand -driven disinflationary effects will become more prevalent in the 
second half of the year. Accordingly, considering all factors affecting the inflation outlook, 
the Committee decided to keep the policy rate unchanged.  
18. The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is a key factor for 
achieving lower sovereign risk, lower long -term interest rates, and stronger economic 
recovery. Keeping the disinflation process in track with the targeted path requires the 
continuation of a cautious monetary stance. In this respect, the monetary stance will be 
determined by considering the indicators of the underlying inflation trend to ensure the  
4 continuation of the disinflation process. The Centr al Bank will continue to use all available 
instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stability objectives.  
19. The Committee assessed that it is essential to sustain the coordination between monetary 
and fiscal policies to minimize the pandem ic-related economic risks. The multifaceted effects 
of the pandemic on the economy call for coordinated policy actions aiming particularly at 
smoothing cash flows and stabilizing employment in order to minimize the impact on firms 
and households. Therefore , it is considered to be of critical importance that macro -scale 
monetary and fiscal policies be complemented with policy measures that target the most -
affected economic units and consider sectoral interactions. Meanwhile, ensuring that policy 
measures are  designed in a targeted and temporary fashion would support policy 
effectiveness.  
20. It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise 
its stance.  