Press Release on Fees That Banks Can
Charge Commercial Clients
10 February 2020, No: 2020-07

Fees that banks can charge their commercial clients for products and
services, offered under four categories as “Commercial Loans”,
“Foreign Trade”, “Cash Management” and “Payment Systems”, have
been limited to 51 items.
Pursuant to the Council of Ministers Decision No. 2006/11188, the Central Bank of the Republic of
Turkey issued the “Communiqué No. 2006/1 on the Deposit and Loan Rates, the Profit and Loss
Participation Rates for Participation Accounts, and Other Non-Interest Benefits to be Received via
Credit Transactions”. Article 4 of this Communiqué stipulates that the characteristics and limits of
other non-interest benefits to be received and charges to be collected shall be determined freely.
However, it was observed over time that banks collect numerous fees, commissions and charges of
the same characteristic under different names, and the collected amounts are far from being
comparable and might lead to overcharging. Consequently, client complaints have increased
significantly.
Therefore, the Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency (BRSA) issued the “Regulation on
Procedures and Principles Regarding the Fees to be Charged on Financial Consumers” on 3 October
2014, which simplified the fees that can be charged on financial consumers, and ensured
transparency in charges. However, problems persisted regarding the charges imposed on
commercial clients.
Following comprehensive evaluations, it has been decided to make a regulation to render the fees
that can be collected more transparent, lucid and comparable by determining the types and
characteristics, maximum amounts or rates of fees that banks can charge their commercial clients
for products and services as well as the standards thereof. To this end, the “Communiqué No.
Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası
İdare Merkezi
Hacı Bayram Mah. İstiklal Cad. No:10 06050
Ulus Altındağ Ankara 0312 507 50 00
www.tcmb.gov.tr

2020/4 on Procedures and Principles Regarding the Fees That Banks Can Charge Their Commercial
Clients” has been published.
In this Communiqué,
►

Fees that banks can charge their commercial clients for products and services, offered
under the four categories as “Commercial Loans”, “Foreign Trade”, “Cash Management”
and “Payment Systems”, have been limited to 51 items,

►

Quantitative or qualitative restrictions have been introduced to some fee items,

►

Obligation to inform has been imposed on banks for transparency purposes.

Provisions in the Communiqué shall be effective as of 1 March 2020. These provisions shall also
apply to transactions to be conducted after the effective date under the contracts made before this
date.
The amounts and rates limited in the Communiqué are upper limits, and the fees and rates to be
applied will certainly be determined by competitive market conditions as well as by the business
relations between banks and commercial clients.
Moreover, it has been decided to repeal the Communiqué No. 2006/1 on 1 March 2020 and to
replace it with the “Communiqué No. 2020/3 on the Deposit and Loan Rates and the Profit and Loss
Participation Rates for Participation Accounts”, to be effective 1 March 2020. With the
Communiqué No. 2020/3, the provisions of the repealed Communiqué excluding those on other
non-interest benefits to be received are broadly preserved, and provisions are changed regarding
the profit and loss participation rates to be applied in participation accounts, taking into account
the BRSA regulations and international interest-free finance principles and guidelines.
Contact
For further information, you may send an e-mail to basin@tcmb.gov.tr.

Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası
İdare Merkezi
Hacı Bayram Mah. İstiklal Cad. No:10 06050
Ulus Altındağ Ankara 0312 507 50 00
www.tcmb.gov.tr

