 
1  
Summary of the Monetary Policy 
Committee Meeting  
26 November  2020 , No: 2020-70 
Meeting Date:  19 November  2020 
Inflation Developments  
1. In Octo ber, consumer prices rose by 2.13%, while annual inflation increased by 0.14  points  to 
11.89%. Annual inflation increased in food and core goods group s, while it decreased in the 
energy group and remained flat in the services group. While the rise in food inflation 
stemmed from both unprocessed and processed food prices, the rise in core goods inflation 
was mainly driven by durable  goods. Annual energy inflation decreased owing to the base 
effect in electricity  prices. Against this background, while annual inflation in B and C indices 
increased, th e trend of the B index remained almost flat and the trend of the C index slightly  
decreased.  
2. In October, a nnual inflation in food and non -alcoholic beverages  increased by 1.56  points  to 
16.51%. Due to the  rally in international food prices and exchange  rate developments, annual 
inflation in unprocessed food group increased by 1.31 points to 18.78% and that of 
processed food prices increased by 1.70 points to 14.49%. Eggs, pulses and rice played a 
major role in the increase in unprocessed food prices. In  the processed food  group, prices of 
bread and cereals as well as other processed food s posted high monthly increases . The 
adverse ou tlook in the latter  was mainly driven by fats and oils.  
3. Energy prices increased by 2.09% in October, yet annual inflation i n the energy group 
decreased  by 2.79 points to 3.88%. In this period, although electricity prices rose by 5.76% , 
annual inflation  in the group decreased owing to the base effect . In October , international oil 
prices posted a limited decrease;  however, depreciation of the Turkish lira  led to a rise  in 
fuel-oil prices and curbed a more  favorable outlook in the energy group inflation.   
4. In October, prices of core goods increased by 3.29% and group’s annual inflation rose by 0.41 
points to 12.09%. Owing to e xchange rate developments and the lagged effects of the st rong  
credit impulse, the uptrend in the annual inflation in durable goods group continued,  led by 
furniture, automobiles and white goods, and increased by 2.41 points to 19.79%. Meanwhile, 
monthly  and annual inflation  in the clothing and footwear remained  weak also due to the 
sectoral dem and conditions. In other core goods, although annual inflation remained 
relatively low at 9.40% , the effects of exchan ge rate developments have  been  observed i n 
mon thly price increases.  
5. Services prices was up 0.71 percent  in October  and annual inflation in the group rose by 0.08 
points to 10.92%. Annual inflation decreased in communication and transport services, while 
it increased in restaurants- hotels, rents and o ther services. Other services group prices were 
 
2 affected by exchange  rate developments, meanwhile, maintenance and repair of personal 
transport  equipment  as well as health services continued to be the most prominent items. 
While price increases in communic ation and transport services were moderate, annual 
inflation in communication decreased on the back of the base effect.  
6. In November, the rise in inflation expectations continued. The year -end inflation expectation 
increased by 71 basis points to 12.47%; the 12 -month- ahead inflation expectation increased 
by 24 basis points to 10.77%, and the 24 -month -ahead inflation expectat ion increased by 15 
basis points to 9.20%.  
Factors Affecting Inflation  and Risks   
7. Global economic activity has recovered partially in the third quarter. However, uncertainties 
regarding global economic activity heightened due to the recent increases in Covid -19 cases.  
The recently elevated pandemic -related restrictions in the European countries keep 
downside risks to external demand and export outlook in place. Moreover, uncertainties 
remain regarding the possible effects of the pandemic and health measu res on consumption 
habits and general spending behavior. In case of prolonged normalization due to delays in 
widespread vaccination, the recovery in the global activity may be slow and the global risk 
appetite may fluctuate.   
8. Although crude oil prices  are still below the pre -pandemic period levels, they have risen  since 
the previous MPC Meeting . Besides, the upward trend in commodity prices excluding energy, 
specifically industrial metals and agricultural commodities, increases the upward cost 
pressure on c onsumer inflation. Developments in international prices as well as the exchange 
rate have an adverse effect on  the trend inflation , particularly  in food and core goods groups.  
9. Advanced and emerging economies maintain their expansionary monetary and fiscal stances. 
While long -term interest rates remain at historic lows across advanced economies, both 
central bank statements and market expectations suggest that the low  interest rate 
environment is likely to continue for a long period. The effectiveness of the se policies on 
financial markets, growth and employment will depend on the course of the pandemic and 
the available policy room  in each country . 
10. Portfolio inflows to emerging economies have continued at an increasing scale since the 
previous MPC meeting due to improved risk sentiment. However, excluding China, inflows to 
bond markets increased at a limited extent, while those to equity markets rema ined 
relatively weak. Reinforced perceptions that policy rates will remain low in advanced economies and possible incentive packages  are likely to improve portfolio flows to emerging 
economies  in the upcoming period.  
11. Domestic  economic activity posted a ma rked  recovery in th e third quarter. According to 
September data, industrial production index i ncreased by 1.7% month- on-month  and by 
30.3% quarter -on-quarter, exceed ing its pre-pandemic level s. Considering together with the 
developments in turnover indices , economic activity recovered with a wide sectoral diffusion  
led by sectors sensitive to financing conditions and those producing goods for t he domestic 
market. Nevertheless, the weak trend continued in goods and services sectors strong ly tied 
to the touri sm sector.  
12. The recovery in economic activity continues. However, l eading indicators and hig h-frequency 
data suggest that economic activity has been decelerating since mid -October. Recently, 
exports slowed down  due to pandemi c-driven limitations in Europe while  domestic demand 
remained  relatively strong. Meanwhile, p artial restrictions introduced due to the increasing  
3 number of cases heighten uncertainties on the short -run outlook of economic activity, 
particularly the services sector.   
13. Strengthening  domest ic demand due to the lagged effects of strong credit impulse during 
the pandemic, affects the current account balance adversely through the imports channel.  In 
November, imports excluding gold remain s almost flat, while imports of gold  has still been  
stron g, despite some slowdown. On the other hand, t he restraining effects of pandemic -
related  measur es introduced in Europe have st arted to be observed;  however,  since 
measures are not as tight as those introduced at the early stages of the pandemic and the 
activity in manufacturing industry continues, the favorable outlook particula rly in exports  of 
intermediary goods is maintained. The Committee underscored the importance of the course 
of the current account balance in terms of a lasting recovery in eco nomic activity and 
financial stability.  
14. The recovery in economic activity has a positive effect on the labor market. In August, n on-
farm em ployment  increased across sectors, while so far, employment losses have been 
partially compensated . In this period, both the labor force participation rate posted an 
increase on the back of economic recovery and unemployment rates receded. Leading indicators reveal that new job posts increased and employment opportunities continued to 
improve.   
Monetary Policy  
15. The Commi ttee emphasized that, within the inflation targeting framework , it w ill decisively 
use all of its policy tools in order to achieve and maintain price stability, by taking into account all factors affecting inflation and the increased  risks.  
16. The lagged effects of depreciation in Turkish lira, increasing international commodity prices 
and deterioration in inflation expectations affect the inflation outlook adversely. While 
tracked data for November point to an increase in inflation due to the r ecent exchange rate 
volatility, this is assessed to be temporary with the decisive monetary policy stance. 
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to implement a transparent and strong monetary 
tightening in order to eliminate risks to the inflation outlook , contain inflation expectations 
and restore the disinflation process.  In this context, the one -week repo auction interest rate, 
which is the policy rate, is  increased from 10. 25 percent  to 15 percent . In the periods ahead, 
all factors affecting inflation will be taken into account, and tightness of monetary policy will 
be decisively sustained until a permanent fall in inflation is achieved. The Central Bank will 
continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stabi lity 
objectives.  
17. In addition to monetary tightening, the Committee  decided to adopt a simp le operational 
framework  to enhance transparency and predictability, and decided to  provide all funding at 
the one -week repo auction rate, which is the main policy rate. In this regard, the funding 
currently provided by the CBRT via traditional method repo auctions with one -month 
maturity and late liquidity window facilities will instead be provided via one -week quantity 
repo auctions, which is the principal monetary policy tool as of 20 November 2020.  
18. In line with the primary objective of price stability, the Committee assessed the need for a revision in the reserve requirement policy in order to enhance the effectiveness of monetary 
transmission mechanism.  
  
4 19. Recently, positive expectations regarding mo netary policy have been contributing to the 
decline in the country risk premium. The Committee assessed that the permanent 
establishment of a low inflation environment will affect macroeconomic and financial 
stability positively through the fall in country  risk premium, reversal in the dollarization 
trend, accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and the perpetual decline in financing costs.  
20. In order to achieve price stability, a strong policy coordination and an integrated macro 
policy mix involving all s take holders are required.  
21. It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its stance.  