 
 
Decision of the Monetary Policy Committee  
July 23, 2020, No: 2020 -38 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Murat Uysal ( Governor ), Murat Çetinkaya, Ömer Duman, Uğur Namık Küçük, Oğuzhan Özbaş, Emrah 
Şener, Abdullah Yavaş . 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) has decided to keep the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) constant at 8.25  percent.  
Developments regarding the spread of the coronavirus substantially weaken ed global  growth in the 
second quarter . While global economic activity has shown signs of partial recovery in the third quarter 
following the normalization steps taken by several countries , uncertainties on global economic recovery 
remain high . Advanced and emerging economies continue to take expansionary monetary and fiscal 
measures . The pandemic disease is closely monitored for its evolving global impact on capital flows , 
financial conditions , international trade  and commodity prices .   
Economic  recovery , which started  in May following gradual steps towards normalization , is gaining pace . 
Recent monetary and fiscal measures that aim to contain negative effects of the pandemic on the Turkish 
economy  contribute to  financial stability and economic  recovery by supporting the potential output of 
the economy.  Although tourism revenues declined due to the pandemic , easing travel restrictions are 
expected to contribute to a partial improvement. T he recovery in exports of goods  and low levels of 
commodit y prices will support the current account balance in the upcoming period s.  
Despite the restraining effects of aggregate demand conditions, pandemic -related rise in unit costs have 
led to an increase in the trends of core inflation indicators. International commodity prices have 
continued to restrain consumer inflation, while food inflation has ris en due to seasonal and pandemic -
related effects. As the normalization process continues, supply -side facto rs, which have prevailed recently  
due to pandemic -related restrictions , will phase  out. Indeed , leading indicators show that monthly price 
increases have started to slow  down in services groups that have been subject to capacity constraints 
during the norm alization process. The Committee maintains the view that d emand -driven disinflationary 
effects will become more prevalent in the second half of the year , but risks on the end -year projection 
are considered to be on the upside  due to recent realizations  in inflation . Accordingly, considering all 
factors affecting the inflation outlook, the Committee decided to keep  the policy rate  unchanged .  
The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is a key factor for achieving 
lower sove reign risk, lower long -term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery. Keeping the 
disinflation process in track with the targeted path requires the continuation of a cautious monetary 
stance. In this respect, monetary stance will be determined by con sidering the indicators of the underlying 
inflation trend to ensure the continuation of the disinflation process. The Central Bank will continue to 
use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stability objectives.  
It shoul d be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working days.  
