1 
  
Press Release on Interest Rates  
16 December 2021  No: 2021-59 
 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Şahap Kavcıoğlu (Governor), Taha Çakmak, Mustafa Duman, Elif Haykır Hobikoğlu, Emrah Şener, 
Yusuf Tuna.  
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to reduce the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) from 15 percent to 14 percent.  
The r eintroduction of travel restrictions and lockdowns  due to the new variants  keep s the 
downside risk s to global economic activity alive  and raise s the uncertainty . Recovery in global 
demand, high course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some sectors and rise in 
transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally. While 
the effects of high global inflation on inflation expe ctations and international financial markets 
are closely monitored, central banks in advanced economies assess that the rise in inflation on 
the back of rising energy prices and imbalances between supply and demand may last longer 
than previously anticipat ed. Accordingly, while monetary policy communication of central banks 
in advanced economies varies with their diverse outlook for economic activity, labor market and 
inflation expectations , they continue their supportive monetary stances and asset purchase  
programs.  
National income data and l eading indicators show that domestic economic activity remains 
strong, with the help of robust external demand. The spread of domestic vaccination throughout 
the society facilitates the recovery in services, tourism and  related sectors, which have been 
adversely affected by the pandemic, and leads to a more balanced composition in economic 
activity. Current account balance is expected to post a surplus in 2022 due to the strengthening 
of the upward trend in exports . Strengthening of the improvement trend in current account 
balance is important for price stability objective , and in that respect , developments in commercial 
and consumer loans are closely monitored . 
Increase in inflation in November has been driven by developments in exchange rates  and supply 
side factors such as the rise in global food and agricultural commodity prices, supply constraints, 
and demand developments. The Committee decided to complete the use of the limited room 
implied by transitory effec ts of supply -side factors and other factors beyond monetary policy’s 
control on price increases and reduced the policy  rate by 100 basis points. C umulative impact of 
the recent policy decisions will be monitored in  the first quarter of 2022 and during this  period, 
all aspects of the policy framework will be reassessed in order to create a foundation for a 
sustainable price stability . 
The CBRT will continue to use decisively all available instruments until strong indicators point to a 
permanent fall in infla tion and the medium -term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the 
primary objective of price stability. Stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic 
stability and financial stability through the fall in country risk premium, continu ation of the 
reversal in currency substitution and the upward trend in foreign exchange reserves, and durable 
decline in financing costs. This would create a viable foundation for investment, production and 
employment to continue growing in a healthy and s ustainable way.  
2 
 The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data -driven 
framework.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working 
days.  