Summary of the Monetary Policy
Committee Meeting
25 February 2021, No. 2021-11
Meeting Date: 18 February 2021

Inflation Developments
1.

In January, consumer prices were up by 1.68% and annual inflation rose by 0.37 points to
14.97%. The rise in inflation was mainly driven by core goods and energy groups. While
annual inflation in services slightly decreased, the fall in food annual inflation was led by
fresh fruits and vegetables. Against this background, annual inflation rates and trends of B
and C indices increased.

2.

Although prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 2.48% in January, annual
inflation in the group decreased by 2.50 points to 18.11%. While processed food inflation
increased by 2.59 points to 18.11%, unprocessed food inflation decreased by 8.26% to
18.08% also due to the base effect. The significant drop in seasonally adjusted vegetable
prices became the key driver of the marked fall in unprocessed food prices. Unlike the
favorable outlook in fresh fruits and vegetables prices, the rapid rise in other unprocessed
food prices continued. Following the adjustment in the reference raw milk price, milk prices
significantly increased (14.52%), while the rise in meat prices was another prominent
development. Processed food prices increased by 3.75% in January, led by cheese, other
dairy products and fats and oils. The rise in the reference raw milk price widely affected
related food products and leading indicators point that this trend, although slowing down,
continues in February. Despite the appreciation in the Turkish lira, developments in
international commodity prices continued to affect processed food prices adversely,
particularly those of fats and oils. As a result, annual food inflation excluding fresh fruits and
vegetables rose to 19.89%.

3.

In January, energy prices increased by 3.24% and annual inflation in the energy group
reached 7.86%, driven by adjustments in administered prices. The rise was led by price
increases in electricity (6.18%), municipal water (7.15%) and natural gas (1.09%) prices.
Despite the rise in international crude oil prices, the rise in fuel oil prices remained limited
(0.65%) thanks to the appreciation in the Turkish lira and the sliding scale system. The
Committee noted that annual inflation in the energy group, which significantly decreased in
February-April period last year, would continue to increase in the upcoming months due to
the base effect, despite the limiting effect of the sliding scale system.

4.

In January, core goods prices was up 0.47% and annual inflation in the core goods group
increased by 2.94 points to 20.18%. The cumulative exchange rate effects and demand
conditions as well as the minimum wage developments, international commodity prices and
supply constraints continued to affect durable goods inflation. In this period, while price
increases in automobiles and electrical and non-electrical equipment decelerated, furniture
prices posted a high increase of 6.31%. Other core goods prices, which are affected by the
lagged effects of exchange rate developments, increased by 2.03%. Seasonal sales in
clothing and footwear, groups limiting consumer inflation, remained more limited compared
1

to the previous year and annual inflation in the group increased. Leading indicators suggest
that a partial decline has started in cumulative exchange rate effects on the core goods
inflation trend. Yet, the Committee highlighted the upside risks to clothing inflation that was
contained by pandemic-led weak demand conditions.
5.

In January, services prices rose by 1.87%, while annual services inflation decreased by 0.14
points to 11.52%. Annual inflation increased in rents, restaurants-hotels and communication
groups, while posting a more significant rise in the transport group, and decreased in other
services. The rise in transport services was mainly driven by the adjustments in intra-city
transportation fees. The rise in annual inflation in restaurants-hotels was mainly driven by
catering services, and the increases in food prices and the minimum wage were influential in
this development. Excluding communication, the trend of the services inflation remained
high. The Committee has reiterated that pandemic-led dynamics have contained the services
inflation, particularly inflation in accommodation, package tours, education, transport,
recreational and cultural services, and underlined the upside risks associated with the
normalization process. Moreover, it was noted that the special communication tax, which
was raised from 7.5% to 10%, had an upside effect on services inflation, as confirmed by
leading indicators.

6.

Inflation expectations decreased in January and also in February, however remained at
elevated levels. In CBRT Survey of Expectations the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation
decreased by 0.17 points to 10.36% and 24 month-ahead inflation expectation decreased by
0.11 points to 9.03%.

7.

The Committee evaluated the impact of the change in the weights in consumer prices index
on the forecast path presented in the January Inflation Report. It was noted that the rise in
the weights of groups with high annual inflation would make an upside impact on annual
inflation until mid-2021. The impact of the weight on annual inflation was projected to reach
0.5 points by April, then post a gradual decline in the rest of the year and die out towards
the end of the year.

Factors Affecting Inflation and Risks
8.

Global economic activity data indicate that the partial recovery since the third quarter
continues, albeit with some deceleration. However, despite ongoing vaccination efforts, risks
to the global economic activity prevail due to uncertainties pertaining to the vaccination
process and the course of the pandemic. The effects of pandemic-related restrictions in
European countries are more prevalent on the services sector, while manufacturing industry
remains strong.

9.

Advanced and emerging economies maintain their expansionary monetary and fiscal
stances. Despite the recent rise, long-term interest rates in advanced economies are still at
historically low levels. Even though central banks announce in their statements that inflation
is likely to increase temporarily in the post-pandemic normalization process, the forward
guidance delivered and market expectations point that the low interest environment would
continue for an extended period in advanced economies. The effectiveness of these policies
on financial markets, growth and employment will depend on the course of the pandemic
and the available policy room in each country.

10. Similar to the previous MPC meeting period, emerging economy portfolio markets continued
to attract large volume of inflows due to improved risk sentiment. In this period, the trend of
inflows to bond markets of emerging economies remained the same as the previous MPC
meeting, while inflows to equity markets continued increasingly.

2

11. Crude oil prices have been rapidly increasing since the last MPC meeting. In addition, the
ongoing rise in commodity prices excluding energy, specifically agricultural commodities and
industrial metals, have an adverse effect on both producer and consumer inflation. Inflation
is quite high in paper products and basic metals sectors, which are main input providers for
the manufacturing industry. Supply constraints have become more pronounced as delivery
times lengthened in those and related sectors. Other items driving producer inflation higher
include vegetable oils, animal feed, processed steel products, vehicles and electronic
products. These items affect consumer inflation through food and durable goods. The
Committee stated that in the upcoming months, consumer inflation would increase
consistent with the past projections due to the base effect of import prices and the rise
would be mainly driven by the energy group. The Committee noted the important role of
commodity prices in continuing inflationary pressures despite the appreciation in the
Turkish lira, and reiterated the upside risks for the upcoming months.
12. Economic activity is on a strong course. In December, the industrial production index
increased by 1.3% month-on-month and 12.1% year-on-year. Thus, production gained
strength, having grown by 4.8% in the fourth quarter from the third quarter. While turnover
and retail trade volume indices also strengthened compared to the third quarter, economic
activity was considerably buoyant in services excluding tourism-related sectors as well as in
trade. Hence, pre-pandemic levels were exceeded widely across sectors excluding industrial
and services sector groups that were adversely affected by the pandemic.
13. The strong course of economic activity is also reflected onto the labor market.. In November
period, seasonally adjusted nonfarm employment increased by 0.2% from the previous
period, while total and nonfarm unemployment rates were 12.9% and 14.9%, respectively.
During this period, employment was up in the industrial sector amid supported by upward
trend in exports, but edged down in construction and services. The fall in services
employment was driven by the sectors that have been hit hardest by the pandemic.
14. While the downward effects of the pandemic-related restrictions on the economy have been
limited, the slowdown in activity in services and related sectors and uncertainties
surrounding the short-run outlook of these sectors prevail. Survey indicators for February
indicated that manufacturing industry activity remains strong, particularly in intermediate
and durable goods sectors. While there is no additional slowdown in domestic demand,
there is some weakening in external demand mainly due to lockdown restrictions in Europe.
Domestic demand faces upside risks associated with the timing of lifting pandemic-related
restrictions. The Committee assessed that the inflationary effects of the sectoral divergences
that emerged due to pandemic dynamics and the macro policy mix, along with the risks they
imply for the period ahead should be monitored.
15. Evaluating the output gap indicators related to the cyclical state of the economy, the
Committee concluded that economic activity started converging to its underlying trend due
to some slowdown in the first quarter, but demand-side inflationary effects continue to exist
throughout the quarter. Business and household surveys indicate that the demand for
durable goods has been strong. Some members of the Committee underlined that personal
loan demand is still brisk due to high inflation expectations, and reiterated that the effects of
the monetary policy tightening are yet to be felt. To this end, developments in credit growth
and its composition will be monitored closely.
16. The strengthening domestic demand, due to the cumulative effects of high credit growth
during the pandemic, continues to have an adverse effect on the current account balance. In
addition, rising international prices for oil and other commodities also affect the external
balance. Gold imports have declined to their historical averages since mid-January. The

3

Committee assessed that terms of trade-related risks to the current account balance may be
limited if that trend in gold imports hints at a permanent improvement.
17. Credit growth has started to slow down amid tighter financial conditions. The limiting effect
of the slowdown in loans on domestic demand and imports is expected to be more
pronounced in the upcoming period. The Committee underscored once again the
importance of the course of the current account balance in terms of a lasting recovery in
economic activity and financial stability.

Monetary Policy
18. The Committee re-emphasized that monetary policy decisions will be taken within the
framework of inflation targeting regime and with the priority of price stability. The monetary
policy stance will be set taking into account the upside risks to the inflation outlook and with
a focus on bringing inflation down permanently in a cautious manner and achieving price
stability target.
19. Domestic demand conditions, cumulative cost effects, in particular the exchange rate
effects, increasing international food and other commodity prices and high levels of inflation
expectations continue to affect the pricing behavior and inflation outlook adversely. The
decelerating impact of the strong monetary tightening on credit and domestic demand is
expected to become more significant; hence the effects of demand and cost factors on
inflation are envisaged to wane gradually.
20. On the other hand, the ongoing upward trend in international commodity prices, supply
constraints intensifying in some sectors, and the adjustments in wage and administered
prices maintain their importance for the medium-term inflation outlook. The tight monetary
stance will serve as a significant buffer against external and temporary volatilities in the
context of inflation expectations, pricing behavior and financial market developments.
21. Accordingly, the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained decisively, taking into
account the end-2021 forecast target, for an extended period until strong indicators point to
a permanent fall in inflation and price stability. In regard to the indicators pointing to a
permanent fall in inflation and price stability, indicators for the underlying trend of inflation
and pricing behavior, diffusion indices, demand and cost factors, and inflation expectations
are monitored closely for their compatibility with the targets in the forecast horizon. The
interaction of risks posed by soaring commodity prices to the inflation outlook with the
pricing behavior and inflation expectations will be closely monitored. In addition, there has
been recently an acceleration in consumer loans. Additional monetary tightening will be
delivered if needed.
22. The balance between the monetary policy rate and actual/expected inflation will be
sustained decisively to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until permanent price stability
and the 5% target are reached. Sustaining the tight monetary policy stance in such a
manner, besides attaining permanent price stability, will foster macroeconomic and financial
stability positively by facilitating the fall in country risk premium, the reversal in currency
substitution, the accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and the perpetual decline in
financing costs.
23. The effects of the monetary policy stance on money markets have been examined. There
has been some decline in loan and deposit rates, recently. The Committee stated that
Turkish lira reserve requirements need to be increased in order to enhance the effectiveness
of the monetary transmission mechanism. For the same purpose, the Committee discussed
whether to lower the rates within the Reserve Options Mechanism, which allows a certain
ratio of Turkish lira required reserves to be maintained in foreign currency and gold. The
4

Committee emphasized that the policy rate is the sole instrument to determine the
monetary policy stance, while the required reserve ratio is a tool that affects the
transmission of the monetary stance determined by the policy rate to deposit, loan and
other money markets.
24. The Committee reiterated its judgement that in order to achieve price stability, a strong
policy coordination and a holistic macro policy mix involving all stakeholders are required.
25. In its decision-making process, the CBRT adopts a framework with a medium term
perspective, based on analyzing all factors affecting inflation and the interaction between
these factors.
26. It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise
its stance.

5

