1 Press Release on Interest Rates  
18 March 202 1 No: 2021-13 
Participating Committee Members 
Naci Ağbal (Governor), Murat Çetinkaya, Ömer Duman, Uğur Namık Küçük, Oğuzhan Özbaş, 
Emrah Şener, Abdullah Yavaş.  
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to increase the policy rate (one-week repo 
auction rate) from 17 percent to 19 percent. 
Global growth outlook has improv ed and international commodity prices have risen on the back 
of expansionary monetary and fiscal policies as well as positive developments in the vaccination 
process. Rising global inflation expectations lead to uncertainties about advanced economy 
monetary policies, and volatility in global financial markets.  
Economic activity is on a strong course. As the pandemic-related restrictions are being eased , 
economic activity is expected to pick up in services and related sectors. Nevertheless, risks for 
economic activity remain significant depending on possible developments regarding the course 
of the pandemic. Strong domestic demand due to the cumulative effects of high credit growth 
during the pandemic and the rise in import prices continue to adverse ly affect the current 
account balance. On the other hand, credit growth, which has slow ed down amid tighter financial 
conditions, has recently trend ed upwards. 
Domestic demand conditions, cumulative cost effects, in particular the exchange rate effects, 
increasing international food and other commodity prices and high levels of inflation 
expectations continue to affect the pricing behavior and inflation outlook adversely. On the other 
hand, supply constraints intensifying in some sectors and the adjustments in wages and 
administered prices maintain their importance for the medium-term inflation outlook. While the 
expectation that the decelerating impact of the monetary tightening on credit and domestic 
demand to become more significant is maintained, the projected gradual waning in demand and 
cost factors is being delayed by the recent upward trend in credit growth and increase in import 
costs. 
Considering the upside risks to inflation expectations, pricing behavior and the medium-term 
inflation outlook associated with these developments, the MPC has decided to implement a 
front-loaded and strong additional monetary tightening. 
The tight monetary policy stance will be maintained decisively, taking into account the end-2021 
forecast target, for an extended period until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in 
inflation and price stability. In regard to the indicators pointing to a permanent fall in inflation 
and price stability, indicators for the underlying trend of inflation and pricing behavior, diffusion 
indices, demand and cost factors, and inflation expectations will continue to be monitored closely 
for their compatibility with the targets in the forecast horizon. Additional monetary tightening will 
be delivered if needed. 
The balance between the monetary policy rate and actual/expected inflation will be sustained 
decisively to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until permanent price stability and the 5 
percent target are reached. Sustaining the tight monetary policy stance in such a manner, 
2 
 besides attaining permanent price stability, will foster macroeconomic and financial stability 
positively by facilitating the fall in country risk premium, the reversal in currency substitution, the 
accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and the perpetual decline in financing costs.  
In its decision -making process, the CBRT adopts a framework with a medium term perspective, 
based on analyzing all factors affecting inflation and the interaction between these factors. It 
should be em phasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its 
stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working 
days.  