Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
Hacı Bayram Mahallesi  
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06050 Ulus Altındağ / Ankara  
+90 (312) 507 50 00  
www.tcmb.gov.tr   
  
Press Release on Central Bank Digital 
Turkish Lira R&D Project  
15 September  2021  No: 2021 -40 
 
The Central B ank of the Republic of Turkey has signed bilateral memorandums of 
understanding with ASELSAN, HAVELSAN and TÜBİTAK -BİLGEM, and established the “Di gital 
Turkish Lira Co llabo ration  Platform” . 
The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (CBRT) continues to research  the potential benefits  of 
introducing  a digital Turkish lira to complement the e xisting payments infrastructure . As part of 
the Central Bank Digital Turkish Lira Research and Development (R&D) Project, t he process that 
started with the completion of the proof of concept now moves on to the next stage  with the 
participation of technology stakeholders . 
The technological research, development and testing processes of the Central Bank Digital 
Turkish Lira R&D Project will be carried out in close collaboration with these technology 
stakeholders.  Accordingly, the CBRT has signed bilateral memorandums of understanding with 
ASELSAN, HAVELSAN and TÜBİTAK -BİLGEM, and established the “Digital Turkish Lira 
Collaboration Platform”. In the light of the findings of the first phase, which involves preliminar y 
testing of strategic and critical technologies related to the project, the plan is to expand the 
platform with the involvement  of new participants .  
For the first phas e of the pilot study, the CBRT will develop a prototype "Digital Turkish Li ra 
Network" and run limited closed -circuit pilot tests with tech nology  stakeholders. Based on the 
results of those tests , the CBRT will unveil advanced phas es of the pilot study that will reflect a 
broader participation. The CBRT also plans to ca rry out tests that may diversify the coverage o f 
the Digital Turkish Lira R&D P roject into areas such as blockchain technology, the use of 
distributed ledgers in payment systems, and integrati on with instant payment systems . 
The CBRT has made no final decision regarding the issuance  of the digital Turkish lira. All 
research is carried out as per the principles of experimental R&D activities. After capacity 
measurements of different technological alternatives are c ompleted and the architectural setups 
are finalized, it will be decided whether the existing technologies can meet the economic, legal 
and financial requirements of the digital Turkish lira.  
The results of the first phase will be announced in 2022 after th e tests are completed.  
 
Contact  
For further information, please send an e -mail to basin@tcmb.gov.tr.  
 
