Summary of the Monetary Policy
Committee Meeting
11 May 2021, No: 2021-22
Meeting Date: 6 May 2021

Inflation Developments
1.

Consumer prices were up by 1.68% in April, and annual inflation increased by 0.95 points to
17.14%. While annual inflation rose in energy, core goods, and services groups, it declined in
the food group. The uptrend in commodity prices continued in this period, and inflation was
affected by the recent exchange rate developments. Against this background, annual
inflation rates of B and C indices increased, and their trends remained high despite some
improvement.

2.

In April, prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 2.13% but the group’s
annual inflation dropped by 0.46 points to 16.98%. Annual inflation edged down by 0.31
points to 14.67% in the unprocessed food group, and by 0.51 points to 19.36% in the
processed food group. Seasonally-adjusted data for unprocessed food suggest a rise in
prices driven by fresh fruits and vegetables. This was mainly led by the strong increase in
vegetable prices due to season transition. Although red and white meat items diverged
unfavorably, price increases in other unprocessed food were more moderate. The high base
in this group was the main factor bringing annual unprocessed food inflation down. While
processed food prices rose by 0.97% month-on-month, international prices continued to
affect the prices of fats and oils. It is judged that international agricultural commodity prices,
which resumed the uptrend in April, will continue to affect food inflation.

3.

While energy prices remained almost flat with only a 0.10% increase in April, annual energy
inflation surged by 6.01 points to 18.44%. In April, prices of bottled gas and natural gas
increased by 1.64% and 1.07%, respectively, whereas fuel prices were down by 0.78%. In this
period of relatively flat international crude oil prices, fuel prices dropped on the back of the
sliding-scale system and the price cap practice that increased the system’s effectiveness.
However, annual energy inflation increased significantly in April due to the pandemic-led low
base from the previous year.

4.

Annual core goods inflation stood at 23.13% in April. Annual inflation decreased in durable
goods but rose in clothing-footwear and other core goods. Durable goods registered
exchange rate-driven price increases, mainly led by automobile prices, while the decline in
furniture prices had a curbing effect. The upward trend in clothing and footwear prices has
persisted since the beginning of the year, and annual inflation climbed by 3.63 points to
10.96% in April with the arrival of the new season. Exchange rate effects were visible in the
other core goods group, and the group’s annual inflation rose by 2.01 points to 18.81%.

5.

In April, services prices increased by 0.72%, and annual services inflation rose by 0.56 points
to 13.12. While the rise in annual inflation was more pronounced in restaurants-hotels and
other services groups, more limited increases were observed in other subgroups. Annual
inflation in restaurants-hotels increased significantly due also to the low base stemming
from the lockdown of last year, while monthly price hikes proved notable both in catering
1

and accommodation services. Price increases in other services were triggered by education
services as well as by items such as maintenance-repair of personal transport equipment
and dental services that are highly sensitive to exchange rate developments. The rise in
private primary and secondary school tuition was mainly driven by the backward indexation
behavior and the expiration of temporary VAT reductions. The Committee noted that there
might be a temporary fluctuation in services inflation due to the lockdown in May and the
possible re-opening in the subsequent period.
6.

Inflation expectations continued to increase in May. While the current year-end inflation
expectation rose by 0.69 points to 13.81%, the 12-month ahead and 24-month ahead
inflation expectations increased by 0.55 points and 0.44 points to 11.81% and 9.99%,
respectively.

Factors Affecting Inflation and Risks
7.

The global economy, having contracted sharply in 2020 due to the pandemic, continues to
recover on the back of accommodative policies and positive developments in the vaccination
process. This improvement process is determined especially by the acceleration in
manufacturing industry activity and global trade. However, despite ongoing vaccination
efforts, risks to the global economic activity prevail due to uncertainties pertaining to the
course of the pandemic.

8.

Commodity prices have increased again in the recent period. Moreover, in tandem with
improved growth expectations in advanced economies, the effects of the rising global
inflation expectations on international financial markets remain significant. The
normalization process has started in emerging economies, where policy rates remain well
below historical averages. Long-term bond rates lead to uncertainties about advanced
economy monetary policies, and volatility in global financial markets. The Committee noted
that global inflationary pressures may lead to a tightening in monetary policies earlier than
current projections, and maintained its assessment that a period marked by increased datasensitivity and related volatilities in global financial markets was entered.

9.

Since the last MPC meeting, portfolio flows to emerging economies have continued at a mild
pace in both bond markets and equity markets. The volatility in long-term bond rates in
advanced economies keeps the risks to portfolio flows to emerging economies alive.

10. Driven by commodity prices and exchange rate developments, producer prices recorded a
high rate of increase spread across the sectors in April as well. Moreover, supply constraints
arising from disruptions in supply chains continue to have an adverse effect on the producer
inflation.
11. In addition to commercial loans, consumer loans exhibit a milder course. The Committee
assessed that the demand and cost-side inflationary effects persisted while a slight
deceleration was observed in aggregate demand.
12. Despite the constraining effect of the pandemic, domestic economic activity is strong.
Manufacturing industry activity exhibits a strong momentum. The seasonally-adjusted
capacity utilization rate rose by 0.6 points to 76.2%, hovering close to pre-pandemic levels.
While domestic demand has slightly decelerated due to pandemic restrictions, external
demand remains strong. PMI data for April point to a sustained rise in export orders and a
partial deceleration in domestic orders.
13. The weak course continues in the services sector, which has been adversely affected by the
pandemic restrictions. The weekly credit card expenditures data suggest that after posting a
recovery in March, the services sector activity weakened in the second half of April due to
the re-tightening of pandemic measures. The Committee assessed that the additional
2

pandemic measures announced for the 29 April-17 May 2021 period would continue to slow
down economic activity, however this slowdown would remain more limited compared to
the last year’s lockdown period. Nevertheless, risks for economic activity exist in either
direction depending on the progress of the pandemic and the vaccination process.
14. In February, nonfarm employment remained flat while total and nonfarm unemployment
rates rose by 0.7 points to 13.4% and 15.3%, respectively, due to the increase in the
participation rate. The high-frequency labor market data suggest that amid tighter
restrictions, the improvement trend in the labor market has come to a halt, and job
opportunities have remained relatively weak in sectors directly affected by the restrictions
and with more limited opportunity for remote work. In the manufacturing sector, the trend
of employment remains strong.
15. Despite the rise in commodity prices, the strong upward trend in exports, the significant fall
in gold imports and the slowdown in credit amid the tightening of financial conditions
support the expected improvement in the current account balance. Preliminary data indicate
that in April, exports excluding gold continued to rise on a monthly basis, whereas imports
excluding gold declined in spite of the rise in commodity prices. The fall of gold imports
significantly below their historical average in April after a gradual slowdown from the second
half of January had a positive effect on the foreign trade balance. As the slowing effects of
the tightening in financial conditions on the domestic demand and imports become more
pronounced in the upcoming period, it is expected that the external balance will continue to
improve. The Committee reiterated its assessment that supply problems in certain sectors,
the automotive sector in particular, might constitute downside risk factors for the current
account balance. The Committee maintained its emphasis on the importance of the course
of the current account balance in terms of a lasting recovery in economic activity and
financial stability.

Monetary Policy
16. The monetary policy stance will be set taking into account the upside risks to the inflation
outlook and with a focus on bringing inflation down permanently in a cautious manner and
achieving the price stability target. Accordingly, the policy stance will continue to be
determined by taking into account inflation developments and inflation expectations, and at
a degree of tightness that will restore the disinflation process as soon as possible and
ensure its sustainability until the medium-term targets are achieved.
17. Demand and cost factors, supply constraints in some sectors, and high levels of inflation
expectations continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior and inflation outlook. The
decelerating impact of the monetary tightening on credit and domestic demand has begun
to be observed. Taking into account the high levels of inflation and inflation expectations,
the current monetary policy stance will be maintained until the significant fall in the April
Inflation Report’s forecast path is achieved. Accordingly, the Committee has decided to
maintain the tight monetary policy stance by keeping the policy rate unchanged at 19%.
18. The tight monetary stance will serve as a significant buffer against external and temporary
volatilities in the context of inflation expectations, pricing behavior and financial market
developments.
19. The CBRT will continue to use decisively all available instruments in pursuit of the primary
objective of price stability. The policy rate will continue to be determined at a level above
inflation to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until strong indicators point to a
permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term 5% target is reached.

3

20. The stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial
stability through the fall in country risk premium, reversal in currency substitution,
accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and perpetual decline in financing costs. This
would create a viable foundation for investment, production and employment to continue
growing in a healthy and sustainable way.
21. Demand and cost-side effects remain significant for inflation given credit market and
economic activity indicators, as well as exchange rate volatility and developments in import
prices. Consumer loans, along with commercial loans, exhibit a milder course, and the
durability of this development is monitored for macroeconomic stability. The outlook for
domestic demand, international prices and global risk appetite heightens the risks arising
from external financing needs to the balance of payments. In formulating the monetary
policy towards the target of price stability, the Committee will continue to follow an
approach that also addresses the risks to financial stability.
22. The Committee reiterated its judgement that in order to achieve price stability, a strong
policy coordination and a holistic macro policy mix involving all stakeholders are required.
23. The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and datadriven framework.

4

