Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
Hacı Bayram Mah. İstiklal Cad. No. 10 06050  
Ulus Altındağ Ankara +90 (312) 507 50 00  
www.tcmb.gov.tr    
Press Release on New Divisions of  CBRT 
Head Office  
3 February  2021  No: 2021-08 
 
Food and Agricultural Product Markets Analysis Division, Participation Banking Division, and 
Financi al Control Division are  established at the CBRT Head Office.  
In view of the  needs related to th e organizational structure, the Central Bank of the Republic of 
Turkey (CBRT)  has decided  to establish : 
- “Food and Agricultural Product Markets Analysis Divisio n” under the Structural Economic 
Research Department,  
- “Participation Banking Division” under the Banking and Financial Institutions Department , 
and 
- “Finan cial Control Division” under the Budget and Financial Reporting Department.   
Functions of the new divisions will be as follows:  
Food and Agricultural Product Markets Analysis Division:  To perform an early warning 
function  by carry ing out a detailed and timely analysis of data regarding the prices  of food and 
agricultural products that are critical to p rice stability , to report the research and analysis results 
in a way to contribute to the monetary policy process, and to fulfill secretarial duties for  the Food 
and Agricultural Product Markets Monitoring and Evaluation Committee .     
Participation Banking Division:  To increase efficiency in the CBRT’s relations and work with 
participation banks, to contribute to the sector’s development and financial stability,  and to carry 
out relations with internation al institutions that work in this  field in a more effective way . 
Financi al Control Division:  To reinforce  the internal financial control system , to increase the 
reliability of financial reporting, and to control whether expendit ures under the budget are in line  
with the Bank’s priorities and comply wi th the efficiency and saving principles.  
These divisions will start operating on 8 February 2021.  
 
 
Contact   
For further information, you may send an e -mail to basin@tcmb.gov.tr.  
 
  
  
