Press Release on Interest Rates
23 September 2021

No: 2021-42

Participating Committee Members
Şahap Kavcıoğlu (Governor), Mustafa Duman, Elif Haykır Hobikoğlu, Uğur Namık Küçük, Emrah
Şener, Semih Tümen.
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to reduce the policy rate (one-week repo
auction rate) from 19 percent to 18 percent.
Worldwide speeding up of vaccination rollout, especially in developed countries, supports the
global economic recovery. Nonetheless, despite the increase in the vaccination rate, new variants
keep the downside risks to global economic activity alive. Strong recovery in global demand, high
course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some sectors and rise in transportation costs
have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally. Unfavorable effects of
weather conditions in major agricultural commodity exporting countries are observed on global
food prices. While the effects of high global inflation on inflation expectations and international
financial markets are closely monitored, central banks in advanced economies assess that the
rise in inflation would be mostly temporary along with normalization in demand composition,
easing of supply constraints and waning base effects. Accordingly, central banks in advanced
economies continue their supportive monetary stances and asset purchase programs.
Leading indicators show that domestic economic activity remains strong in the third quarter, with
the help of robust external demand. The acceleration of domestic vaccination rollout facilitates
the recovery in services, tourism and related sectors, which have been adversely affected by the
pandemic, and leads to a more balanced composition in economic activity. Favorable external
demand conditions and current tight monetary policy impact the current account balance
positively. The current account is expected to post a surplus in the rest of the year due to the
strong upward trend in exports, and the strong progress in the vaccination program stimulating
tourism activities. The improvement in the current account balance is important for the price
stability objective.
Recent increase in inflation has been driven by supply side factors such as rise in food and
import prices and supply constraints, increase in administered prices and demand developments
due to the reopening. It is assessed that these effects are due to transitory factors. On the other
hand, the decelerating impact of the monetary tightening on credit and domestic demand is
being observed. The tightness in monetary stance has started to have a higher than envisaged
contractionary effect on commercial loans. In addition, macroprudential policy framework has
been strengthened to curb personal loan growth. The Committee evaluated the analyses to
decompose the impact of demand factors that monetary policy can have an effect, core inflation
developments and supply shocks. Accordingly it is judged that a revision in monetary policy
stance is needed and the policy rate was decided to be reduced.
The CBRT will continue to use decisively all available instruments until strong indicators point to a
permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the
primary objective of price stability. Stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic
stability and financial stability through the fall in country risk premium, continuation of the
1

reversal in currency substitution and the upward trend in foreign exchange reserves, and durable
decline in financing costs. This would create a viable foundation for investment, production and
employment to continue growing in a healthy and sustainable way.
The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data-driven
framework.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working
days.

2

