1 
  
Press Release on Interest Rates  
12 August 2021  No: 2021-33 
 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Şahap Kavcıoğlu (Governor), Mustafa Duman, Elif Haykır Hobikoğlu, Uğur Namık Küçük, Emrah  
Şener, Semih Tümen, Abdullah Yavaş.  
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to keep the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) constant at 19 percent.  
Worldwide speeding up of vaccination rollout, especially in developed countries, supports the 
global economic recovery. Nonetheless, economies advancing in their vaccination programs 
exhibit a stronger performance in economic activity by easing the restrictions. Strong recovery in 
global demand , high course of commodity prices, supply constraints i n some sectors and rise in 
transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally. 
Unfavorable effects of w eather conditions in major agricultural commodity export ing countries 
are observed on global food prices. The effects  of rising global inflation and inflation expectations 
on international financial markets remain significant.  
Leading indicators show that d omestic economic activity remains strong  in the third quarter, with 
the help of  robust external demand . The accelera tion of domestic vaccination rollout facilitates 
the recovery in services and tourism sectors, which have been adversely affected by the 
pandemic, and leads to a more balanced composition in economic activity. Commercial l oan 
growth exhibits a mild course.  The Committee monitors the adequacy  of the implemented 
macroprudential measures  to curb personal loan  growth , which recently displayed a rise due to 
the reopening and deferred demand . Favorable external demand conditions and current tight 
monetary policy impact the current account balance  positively . The current account is expected 
to post a surplus in the rest of the year due to the strong upward trend in exports, and the strong 
progress in the vaccination program stimulating tourism activities.  The impro vement in the 
current account balance is important  for the price stability  objective .  
In addition to the recent increases in import  prices and administered prices , demand conditions, 
supply constraints in some sectors, possible volatility in inflation during the summer due to the 
reopening, and high levels of inflation expectations continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior 
and inflation outlook. The increase in inflation in July  was driven by the rise in food inflat ion, due 
to supply -side effects in some products  led by climate conditions , the high levels of international 
agricultural commodity and food prices, as well as the effects of the reopening . On the other 
hand, the decelerating impact of the monetary tighten ing on credit and domestic demand is 
being observed. Taking into account the high levels of inflation and inflation expectations, the 
current tight monetary policy stance will be maintained decisively until the significant fall in the 
Inflation Report’s fo recast path is achieved. Accordingly, the MPC has decided to keep the policy 
rate unchanged.  
The CBRT will continue to use decisively all available instruments in pursuit of the primary 
objective of price stability. The policy rate will continue to be determined at a level above inflation 
to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in 
inflation and the medium -term 5 percent target is reached.  
2 
 Stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic  stability and financial stability 
through the fall in country risk premium, reversal in currency substitution, accumulation of 
foreign exchange reserves and perpetual decline in financing costs. This would create a viable 
foundation for investment, produc tion and employment to continue growing in a healthy and 
sustainable way.  
The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data -driven 
framework.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released withi n five working 
days.  