1 
  
Summary of the Monetary Policy 
Committee  Meeting  
28 October 202 1, No: 2021 -47  
Meeting D ate: 21 October  2021 
Inflation Developments  
1. In September, consumer prices rose by 1.25% , and an nual inflation increased by 0.33  points 
to 19. 58%. The rise was mainly driven by price increases in services and energy groups.  
Prices of solid fuels such as coal increased due to developments in international markets 
and energy prices rose on the back o f price increments in municipal water. Annual inflation 
in the food group prices inched down following the  acceleration in price  increases  during 
summer.  Meanwhile, producer inflation remained elevated  as problems in supply chains 
and increases in commodit y market and domestic energy  prices  continued. Against this 
background, while the annual inflation increased in the B and C indices, the  recent trends of 
these core indicators decreased  slightly .    
2. In September, prices of food and non -alcoholic beverages increased by 0.50%, and the 
group’s annual inflation decreased by 0.21 points to 28.79%. Annual inflation in the 
processed food group remained flat at 25.79% while that of unprocessed food posted a 
limited fall to 32.06%. While prices in the processed food group increased by 1.46%, prices in 
the bread and cereals sub -group increased by 2.54% parallel  to the outlook  in the grain 
market. Unprocessed food prices decreased by 0.53% with  the correction in the prices of 
fresh fruits and vegetables sub -group that had been posting high price increases  recently.  
Indeed , the seasonally adjusted  data point to a 4.06 % decline  in fresh fruits  and vegetables 
prices.  
3. Energy  prices increased by 2.20% in September, while annual inflation of the group 
increased by 2.05 points to 22.77%. The ris e was mainly driven by increases  in the prices of 
municipal water and  in solid fuels such as coal and firewood. As a result of the rise in LPG 
prices, the SCT on which was nulled, fuel prices increased by 0.60%. The rise in propane and butane prices affected bottled gas prices adversely as well.  
4. Core goods prices increased by 1.42% in September, while annual group  inflation decreased 
by 0 .90 points to 19.38%. Annual inflation declined in durable goods and clothing -footwear 
groups, while it remained flat in other core goods. Durable goods prices rose by 1.96% in 
September due to the increasing  prices in the furniture group upon the expiry o f special 
offers. While prices of white goods continued to increase in September, automobile prices 
registered a mild course. Despite the price hikes in durable goods, annual inflation in this 
subcategory declined by 2.09 points to 22.12% with the base eff ect. Meanwhile, the mild 
course in annual clothing and footwear inflation was maintained in September.  
5. Services prices increased by 1.62% in September, and annual services inflation rose by 1.18 
points to 15.06%. While annual inflation decreased in commun ication services, it increased 
in other subcategories, chiefly in transport services and restaurants -hotels. Services inflation 
has been affected adversely by the price increases in education -related sectors following the 
2 
 opening of schools and universitie s. The interruption of activities last year and the expiry of 
the temporary VAT cuts in education sector made the price increases in the mentioned 
items more evident. On the other hand, price increases seen in the restaurants -hotels group 
due to normalization steps and food prices persisted in September. Rent inflation seems to 
have gained some pace.  
6. According to recent issue of  Survey of Market Participants, inflation expectations were 
revised upward i n October. The current year -end inflation expectation rose by 0.89 points to 
17.63%, while the 12 -month ahead inflation expectation increased by 0.97 points to 13.91%. 
Currently, the 24 -month ahead inflation expectation is 11.27% and the five -year ahead 
inflation expectation is 7.93%.  
Factors Affecting Inflation and Risks  
7. Despite the recovery in global economic activity in the first half of the year, recently 
published confidence indices have started to decline due to the effect of the pandemic. 
Economies advancing in their vaccination programs exhibit a stronger performance in 
economic activity by easing the restrictions. Nonetheless, despite the increase in the 
vaccination rate, new variants keep the downside risks to global economic activity alive.  
8. Recov ery in global demand, high course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some 
sectors, and the rise in transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price 
increases internationally. Unfavorable effects of weather conditions in major agricultur al 
commodity exporting countries are observed on global food prices. While the effects of high global inflation on inflation expectations and international financial markets are closely 
monitored, central banks in advanced economies assess that the rise in  inflation will prove 
to be mostly temporary with the normalization in demand composition, easing of supply constraints, and waning base effects. Accordingly, central banks in advanced economies 
continue their supportive monetary stances and asset purchase  programs.  
9. Emerging market debt securities markets  have been witnessing outflows since the second 
half of September. The volatility in long -term bond rates in advanced economies and the 
course of global financial conditions keep the risks to portfolio flow s to emerging economies 
alive. The impact of such risks through portfolio flows channel towards Turkey are judged to 
prove to be relatively limited, considering the current levels of non -residents’ portfolio 
positions.  
10. International commodity prices, the lingering problems in supply chains  and developments 
in the domestic energy sector continued to weigh on producer inflation in September. 
Subcategories that recorded the largest price hikes were transport vehicles, energy, paper, 
furniture, wood and cork  products and fabricated metals. Prices increased at a relatively 
higher rate across subsectors of energy and sectors that rely heavily on basic metals.  
11. Leading indicators show that domestic economic activity remains strong with the help of 
robust external demand . Industrial production grew by 5.4% percent month -on-month in 
August, compensating for the fall in July caused by transitory effects. Thus,  in the third 
quarte r industrial production rose by 1.2% quarter -on-quarter and remained on an upward 
trend. Turnover indices and survey -based data indicate that external demand continued to 
support industrial production in the third quarter.  In this period, investment tendenc ies of 
manufacturing industry firms for the next twelve months are also getting stronger.  
12. The spread of domestic vaccination throughout the society facilitates the recovery in 
services, tourism and related sectors, which have been adversely affected by the pandemic, 
and leads to a more balanced composition in economic activity. The retail sales volume index registered a strong increase due to the reopening. The easing of restrictions, together 3 
 with the strong vaccination momentum since June, played a role i n the significant recovery 
trend in tourism and related services items. While the demand for durable consumer goods 
slows down, recovery is observed in non -durable consumer goods.  
13. In the July -August period, employment posted an increase led by the services  sector, due to 
the reopening and the favorable course in tourism. In this period, non -farm employment 
and all its subcomponents exceeded pre -pandemic levels. Survey indicators and high -
frequency data suggest that the improvement in the employment outlook and the positive 
course in the labor market continue thanks to the reopening and the course of economic 
activity.  
14. Favorable external demand conditions and current tight monetary policy impact the current account balance positively. The current account bala nce posted a surplus of USD 0.5 billion 
in August while it decreased by USD 4.6 billion to USD 23 billion in 12 -month cumulative 
terms. Provisional foreign trade data suggest that seasonally adjusted exports and imports 
excluding gold registered a partial correction in September, being stronger in imports, and 
the exports to imports coverage ratio maintained  its high levels . Meanwhile, the recovery 
trend in tourism revenues has become more evident. The improvement in annualized current account is expected t o continue in the rest of the year due to the strong upward 
trend in exports, and the strengthening of this trend is important for the price stability objective.  
Monetary Policy  
15. The monetary policy stance will be set by taking into account the evaluations on the source 
and permanence of risks, along with the extent to which they can be contained by monetary 
policy, and with a focus on bringing inflation down permanently in a cautious manner and 
achieving the price stability target. Accordingly, the policy s tance will continue to be 
determined by taking into account inflation developments, inflation expectations, as well as 
the temporary factors projected to bear effect on these in the short term, and at a degree of 
tightness that will restore the disinflatio n process as soon as possible and ensure its 
sustainability until the medium -term targets are achieved.   
16. Recent increase in inflation has been driven by supply side factors such as rise in food and 
import prices, especially in energy, and supply constraint s, increase in administered prices 
and demand developments due to the reopening. It is assessed that these effects are due to 
transitory factors. On the other hand, the decelerating impact of the monetary tightening on 
credit and domestic demand is being o bserved. The tightness in monetary stance has 
started to have a higher than envisaged contractionary effect on commercial loans. In addition, strengthened macroprudential policy framework has started to curb personal loan 
growth. The Committee evaluated th e analyses to decompose the impact of demand factors 
that monetary policy can have an effect on, core inflation developments and supply shocks. 
Accordingly, the Committee decided to reduce the policy rate by 200 basis points to 16 
percent. Nevertheless, th e Committee assessed that, till the end of the year, supply -side 
transitory factors leave limited room for the downward adjustment to the policy rate.  
17. In order to contain climate -based and other environmental risks, the Committee also 
decided to support su stainable finance initiatives as a long -term policy without prejudice to 
the main objectives of monetary policy.  
18. Inflation is expected to follow a volatile course in the short term due to various supply and 
demand side factors, with commodity prices and ad ministered prices in the lead. However, 
sufficiently tight monetary stance to ensure the return of inflation to its downward trend once temporary effects disappear, will serve as a significant buffer against external and 4 
 temporary volatilities in the conte xt of inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and 
financial market developments.  
19. The CBRT will continue to use decisively all available instruments until strong indicators 
point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium- term 5 percent target is achieved in 
pursuit of the primary objective of price stability.  
20. Stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability 
through the fall in country risk premium, continuation of the reversal in currency 
substitutio n and the upward trend in foreign exchange reserves, and durable decline in 
financing costs.  This would create a viable foundation for investment, production and 
employment to continue growing in a healthy and sustainable way.  
21. Demand and cost -side effects are closely monitored for inflation given the developments in 
the credit market, economic activity, supply -side factors, and import prices. The outlook for 
monetary policies in advanced economies and the global risk appetite heighten the risks to the portf olio flows towards emerging economies. In formulating the monetary policy 
towards the target of price stability, the Committee will continue to follow an approach that also addresses the risks to financial stability.  
22. The Committee reiterated that in order to achieve price stability, strong policy coordination and a holistic macro policy mix involving all stakeholders are required.  
23. The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data -
driven framework.  
 
 