Press Release on Interest Rates
18 November 2021

No: 2021-49

Participating Committee Members
Şahap Kavcıoğlu (Governor), Taha Çakmak, Mustafa Duman, Elif Haykır Hobikoğlu, Emrah Şener,
Yusuf Tuna.
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to reduce the policy rate (one-week repo
auction rate) from 16 percent to 15 percent.
Despite the recovery in global economic activity in the first half of the year and the increase in
the vaccination rate, new variants keep the downside risks to global economic activity alive.
Recovery in global demand, high course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some sectors
and rise in transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases
internationally. Unfavorable effects of weather conditions in major agricultural commodity
exporting countries are observed on global food prices. While the effects of high global inflation
on inflation expectations and international financial markets are closely monitored, central banks
in advanced economies assess that the rise in inflation on the back of rising energy prices and
imbalances between supply and demand may last longer than previously anticipated.
Accordingly, central banks in advanced economies continue their supportive monetary stances
and asset purchase programs.
Leading indicators show that domestic economic activity remains strong, with the help of robust
external demand. The spread of domestic vaccination throughout the society facilitates the
recovery in services, tourism and related sectors, which have been adversely affected by the
pandemic, and leads to a more balanced composition in economic activity. While the demand for
durable consumer goods slows down, recovery continues in non-durable consumer goods. The
improvement in annualized current account is expected to continue in the rest of the year due to
the strong upward trend in exports, and the strengthening of this trend is important for the price
stability objective.
Recent increase in inflation has been driven by supply side factors such as rise in food and
import prices, especially in energy, and supply constraints, increase in administered prices and
demand developments. The revision in the monetary policy stance began to affect commercial
loans positively. In addition, developments in consumer loans are closely monitored. The
Committee evaluated the analyses to decompose the impact of demand factors that monetary
policy can have an effect, core inflation developments and supply shocks and decided to reduce
the policy rate by 100 basis points to 15 percent. The Committee expects that the transitory
effects of supply-side factors and other factors beyond monetary policy’s control on price
increases will persist through the first half of 2022. The Committee will consider to complete the
use of the limited room implied by these factors in December.
The CBRT will continue to use decisively all available instruments until strong indicators point to a
permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the
primary objective of price stability. Stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic
stability and financial stability through the fall in country risk premium, continuation of the
reversal in currency substitution and the upward trend in foreign exchange reserves, and durable
1

decline in financing costs. This would create a viable foundation for investment, production and
employment to continue growing in a healthy and sustainable way.
The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data-driven
framework.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working
days.

2

