1 
  
Press Release on Interest Rates  
6 May 2021  No: 2021-21 
 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Şahap Kavcıoğlu (Governor), Mustafa Duman, Elif Haykır Hobikoğlu, Uğur Namık Küçük, Oğuzhan 
Özbaş, Emrah Şener, Abdullah Yavaş.  
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to keep the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) constant at 19 percent.  
The global economy, having contracted sharply in 2020 due to the pandemic, continues to 
recover  on the back of accommodative policies and positive developments in the vaccination 
process. This improvement process is determined especially by the acceleration in 
manufacturing industry activity and global trade. While commodity prices ha ve increased  again in 
the recent period , the effects of the rising global inflation expectations on international financial 
markets remain significant.  
Despite the constraining effect of the pandemic, domestic economic activity is strong. While 
domestic demand has slight ly decelerated due to pandemic restrictions, external demand 
remains strong. Manufacturing industry activity exhibits a strong momentum, whereas the weak 
course continues in the services sector, which has been adversely affected by the pandemic 
restriction s. Nevertheless, risks for economic activity exist in either direction depending on the 
progress of the pandemic and the vaccination process. Consumer loans, along with commercial 
loans, exhibit a milder course, and the durability  of this development is mo nitored for 
macro economic  stability. Despite the rise in commodity prices, the strong upward trend in 
exports , the significant fall in gold imports  and the slowdown in credit amid the tightening of 
financial conditions support the expected  improvement in the current account  balance .  
Demand and cost factors, supply constraints in some sectors, and high levels of inflation 
expectations continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior and inflation outlook. The 
decelerating impact of the moneta ry tightening on credit and domestic demand  has begun to be 
observed . Taking into account the high levels of inflation and inflation expectations, t he current 
monetary policy stance  will be maintained until the significant fall in the April Inflation Repor t’s 
forecast path is achieved.  Accordingly, the MPC has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged.  
The CBRT will continue to use decisively all available instruments in pursuit of the primary 
objective of price stability. The policy rate will continue to b e determined at a level above inflation 
to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in 
inflation and the medium -term 5 percent target is reached.  
The stability in the general price level will foster macroec onomic stability and financial stability 
positively  through the fall in country risk premium, reversal in currency substitution, 
accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and perpetual decline in financing costs. This would 
create a viable foundation for investment, production and employment to continue gr owing in a 
healthy and sustainable way.  
The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data -driven 
framework.  
2 
 The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working 
days.  