1 
  
Summary of the Monetary Policy 
Committee Meeting  
25 March  2021, No: 2021-14  
Meeting Date : 18 March 2021 
 
Inflation Developments  
1. In February, cons umer prices increased by 0.91% and annual inflation rose by 0.64 points to 
15.61%. While the increase in annual inflation was spread across all sub -group s, the most 
significant contribution came from core goods and energy groups. Under this outlook , while 
annual inflation rates of B and C indices continued to incre ase, their trends dec lined  
somewhat . 
2. Prices of food and non -alcoholic beverages increased by 2. 57% in February , and the group’s 
annual inflation incr eased by 0.29  points to 18 .40%. While t his rise was mainly driven by the 
19.72% i ncrease in processed food prices, unprocessed food inflation decreased by 1.07 
points to 17.01%. In this period, inflation in fresh fruits and vegetables decreased  slightly , 
while in other unprocessed food  group, meat pric es continued to increase and  the l agged 
impact of the adjustment in the reference raw milk price  continued to be observed in milk 
prices. When leading indicators for March  are taken into account, it is observed that the rise 
in the  refere nce raw milk price in January had a s ignificant impact on consumer inflation 
throughout the first quarter. Processed food prices maintained the ir rapid uptrend and 
increased by 2.27% month -on-month. In tandem with the rel ated items in the unprocessed 
food group, prices of processed meat products, cheese and other dairy products increased 
as well. Meanwhile, with the impact of developments in international markets, the high rate 
of increases in fats and oils continued. With these developments, the annual food inflation 
excluding fresh fruits and vegetable s reached 20.75%. Leading indicators signal that annual 
food inflation may slow down  led by unprocessed food prices.  
3. In February, energy prices increased by 0.25% and annual inflation in the energy group was  
8.82%. During  this period , natural  gas and munic ipal water prices increased by 0.80% and 
0.59%, respectively. Despite the rise in international crude oil prices, the rise in fuel oil prices 
remained limited at 0.16% due  to the appreciation  in the Turkish lira and the active use of 
the sliding scale system . The uptrend in oil prices continued in March, however, the sliding 
scale system curbed the effects coming through this channel. As per the EPDK decision of 17 
March 2021, a price cap practice was introduced for every province for a period of 2 mont hs 
and fuel oil prices decreased thereafter . Despite the curbing effect of the sliding scale 
system, the Committee has noted that the annual energy group inflation will significantly  
increase in the next two months due to the low base in the previous  year.   
4. In February, core goods prices decreased by  0.12% and the group’s annual inflation in the 
increased by 1.52 points to 21.70%. While annual inflation increased in clothing , footwear 
and durables goods, it remained flat in other core goods. A nnual inflatio n in the clothing and 
footwear group rose significantly as seasonal discount  rates in the clothing and footwear 
prices were  low this year . Annual inflation in durable goods had been hovering high due to 
2 
 the rise in the international commodity  prices , supply constraints and strong domestic 
demand; nevertheless,  durable goods inflation decelerated  on the back of easing cumulative 
exchange  rate effects. While prices in other core goods decreased by 0.19%, annual inflation 
remained flat. Medicine prices,  which increased by 6.09% on a monthly basis  due to the 
reference price practice, prevented a more favorable outlook in th is group.  It is anticipated  
that the portion of the increase  in medicine prices that were extended to March w ill be 
higher and will continue to affect other core goods inflation  adversely . The Committee 
maintained its emphasis on  the upside risks to clothing inflation that was curbed by weak 
demand conditions  due to the pandemic .  
5. Services prices were up 1.04% in February and the group’s  annual inflation increased by 0.22 
points to 11.74%. Annual inflation increased in communication services and restaurants -
hotels; remained flat in rents and other services,  and decreased in transport services. While 
the regulation in the special communica tion tax was the determining factor in the increase in 
annual inflation in communication services,  it is observed that its impact continued in March 
as well. While the catering services item stood out in the increase in the a nnual  restaurants -
hotels inflat ion, the rise in food prices and the minimum wage  is considered to be effective 
in this development . Meanwhile, other services group prices continue d to display different 
trends  across its sub -items . Annual inflation in health and repair -maintenance  items 
remained high, while that in package tours, recreational and cultural services and education 
activities , adversely  affected by the pandemic , maintained its moderate course.  However , the 
Commi ttee drew attention  to the upward impact of the controlled  normalization  process on 
some service prices  in the light of leading indicators . The Committee also noted that the 
accumulated costs during pandemic lockdowns as well as capacity -limiting measures may 
lead to un it cost- driven inflationary effects  in certa in sectors, particularly  in the restaurants -
hotels groups.  
6. Inflation expectations increased in March. The 12 -month -ahead inflation expectation 
increased by 0.11 points to 10.47% and 24 month -ahead inflation expectation increased by 
0.15 points to 9.18%. I n this period, inflation compensations  derived from bond yields 
increased as well. The Committee  underlined that this course  of inflation expectations 
increased the  risks to pricing behavior  and the medium- term inflation outlook.  
Factors Affecting Inflation and Risks  
7. Global growth outlook has improved and international commodity prices have risen on the 
back of expansionary monetary and fiscal policies as well as positive developments in the 
vaccination process . However, despite ongoing vaccination efforts, risks to the global 
economic activity prevail due to uncertainties pertaining to the vaccination process and the 
course of the pandemic . The effects of pandemic -related restrictions in European countries 
are more prevalent on the services sector, while manufacturing industry remains strong.  
8. In tandem with the recovery in expectations  of growth in advanced economies , rising  global 
inflation expectations and long -term bond rates lead to uncertainties about advanced 
economy monetary policies, and volatility in global financial markets.  Even though central 
banks announce in their statements that inflation is likely to increase temporarily in the post -pandemic normalization process, the forward guidance delivered point s that the low 
interest environment would continue for an extended period in advanced economies.
 
Nevertheless, the Committee noted that global  inflationary pressures might cause an earlier -
than -projected tightening in monetary  policies; it is assessed that a period marked by 
increased data -sensitivity and related volatilities  in global financial markets  is entered . 
9. Since the last MPC meeting, portfolio flows to emerging economies continued,  albeit at a 
slow er rate. In this period, bond markets of emerging e conomies saw outflows, while inflows 3 
 to equity markets accelerated. Portfolio flows to emerging economies may be adversely  
affected if the uptrend in long -term bond rates in advanced economies continues .  
10. Crude oil and industrial metal prices continue to r ise. The sliding scale system limits the 
negative effects of crude oil prices. Although agricultural commodity prices are somewhat 
more moderate, prices of certain products, oils in particular, remain on the rise. High 
producer inflation and ongoing proble ms in supply chains are additional pressure  factor s. 
Despite the partial appreciation in the Turkish lira in February, producer prices continued to soar in input supplying industries such as petroleum, chemical products, food, wood and 
cork, non -metallic minerals and paper. The Committee assessed that upside risks to the 
year -end forecast target announced in the January Inflation Report rose significantly due to 
an increased credit impulse , especially since the end of January, and rising import costs . 
11. Economic activity is on a strong course . In the last quarter of 2020, GDP grew by 5.9% year -
on-year and 1.7% quarter -on-quarter. While private consumption demand maintained its 
strong course spreading across all goods and services, public consumption continued to support domestic demand. Despite the sharp increase in machinery and equipment 
investments, investment expenditures weighed on growth as construction investments fell 
markedly . The Committee noted that, excluding construction, domestic demand exhibited a 
quite  strong momentum, as envisaged , and maintained its assessment that aggregate 
demand conditions were at inflationary levels in the last quarter of 2020.  
12. Economic activity displays a strong quarterly momentum in the first quarter as well and 
being hig her than projected,  remains above its long -term trend. In January, the industrial 
production index increased by 1.0% month -on-month and 2.3% quarter -on-quarter. 
Intermediate and durable consumer goods continued to be the drivers of the increase in industrial production. Turno vers increased in trade and construction in January, but 
remained almost flat in services due to the weak course in sectors that are directly affected 
by the pandemic. As the pandemic -related restrictions are being eased, economic activity is 
expected to p ick up in services and related sectors. In fact, high -frequency data indicate that 
economic activity has gained strength amid credit developments and controlled 
normalization. Nevertheless, risks for economic activity remain significant depending on 
possib le developments regarding the course of the pandemic . 
13. The strong course of economic activity is also reflected onto the labor market. In January, seasonally adjusted nonfarm employment increased by 2.1% from the previous month, 
while total and nonfarm unemployment rates were 12.2% and 14.2%, respectively . During 
this period, employment increased in the services  sector , but remained almost flat in 
industr y and construction sectors.  
14. The data released for the first quarter point to a stronger course compared t o the outlook 
presented in the January Inflation Report regarding economic activity and the cyclical state of 
the economy. The Committee assessed  that the underlying trend in economic activity is 
quite strong, considering the limiting effect of the pandemi c-related restrictions. Business 
and household surveys indicate that the demand for durable goods is still higher than long -
term averages. Some members of the Committee reiterated that personal loan demand is 
still brisk due to high inflation expectations.    
15. Strong domestic demand due to the cumulative effects of high credit growth during the 
pandemic and the rise in import prices continue to adversely affect the current account 
balance. High -frequency data point to an increase in exports and imports, while  the 
developments in terms of trade have a more pronounced impact on the foreign trade deficit. 
Meanwhile, gold imports have declined to their historical averages since mid -January. The 4 
 Committee assessed that terms of trade- related risks to the current ac count balance may be 
limited if that trend in gold imports hints at a permanent improvement . 
16. Credit growth, which has slowed down amid tighter financial conditions, has recently 
trended upwards . Despite this uptick in personal and commercial loans, t he lim iting effect of 
the slowdown in loans on domestic demand and imports is expected to be more 
pronounced in the upcoming period with  the additional monetary tightening . The 
Committee underscored once again the importance of the course of the current account balance in terms of a lasting recovery in economic activity and financial stability . 
Monetary Policy  
17. The Committee re -emphasized that monetary policy decisions will be taken within the 
framework of inflation targeting regime and with the priority of price  stability. The monetary 
policy stance will be set taking into account the upside risks to the inflation outlook and with 
a focus on bringing inflation down permanently in a cautious manner and achieving price 
stability target.  
18. Domestic demand conditions, cumulative cost effects, in particular the exchange rate effects, 
increasing international food and other commodity prices and high levels of inflation 
expectations continue to affect the pricing behavior and inflation outlook adversely. On the 
other hand,  supply constraints intensifying in some sectors and the adjustments in wages 
and administered prices maintain their importance for the medium -term inflation outlook. 
While the expectation that the decelerating impact of the monetary tightening on credit a nd 
domestic demand to become more significant is maintained, the projected gradual waning in demand and cost factors is being delayed by the recent upward trend in credit growth and 
increase in import costs.  
19. As a result of pandemic -driven expansionary poli cies, inflation expectations have been 
increasing recently in the United States, causing long -term bond yields to rise, and thus the 
global risk appetite to follow a volatile course and emerging market currencies to depreciate. 
The tight monetary stance wi ll serve as a significant buffer against external and temporary 
volatilities in the context of inflation expectations, pricing behavior and financial market developments.  
20. Considering the upside risks to inflation expectations, pricing behavior and the medi um-
term inflation outlook associated with these developments, the MPC has decided to 
implement a front -loaded and strong additional monetary tightening.  
21. The tight monetary policy stance will be maintained decisively, taking into account the end-2021 forecast target, for an extended period until strong indicators point to a permanent fall 
in inflation and price stability. In regard to the indicators pointin g to a permanent fall in 
inflation and price stability, indicators for the underlying trend of inflation and pricing 
behavior, diffusion indices, demand and cost factors, and inflation expectations will continue 
to be monitored closely for their compatibil ity with the targets in the forecast horizon. The 
interaction of the risks on the inflation outlook caused by the recent acceleration in loans, the increasing volatility in financial markets due to rising global inflation expectations, and 
the increase in  international commodity prices with the pricing behavior and inflation 
expectations will be closely monitored. Additional monetary tightening will be delivered if 
needed.  
22. The balance between the monetary policy rate and actual/expected inflation will be sustained decisively to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until permanent price stability 
and the 5 percent target are reached. Sustaining the tight monetary policy stance in such a 
manner, besides attaining permanent price stability, will foster mac roeconomic and financial 5 
 stability positively by facilitating the fall in country risk premium, the reversal in currency 
substitution, the accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and the perpetual decline in 
financing costs.  
23. Demand and cost -side effects remain significant for inflation given credit market and 
economic activity indicators, as well as  exchange rate volatility and developments in import 
prices. The outlook for domestic demand, international prices and global risk appetite 
heightens the risk s arising from external financing needs to the balance of payments. In 
formulating the monetary policy towards the target of price stability, the Committee will continue to follow an approach that also addresses the risks to financial stability.  
24. The Commit tee reiterated its judgement that in order to achieve price stability, a strong 
policy coordination and a holistic macro policy mix involving all stakeholders are required.  
25. In its decision- making process, the CBRT adopts a framework with a medium term 
pers pective, based on analyzing all factors affecting inflation and the interaction between 
these factors.   
26. It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise 
its stance.  