Press Release on Interest Rates
15 April 2020

No: 2021-16

Participating Committee Members
Şahap Kavcıoğlu (Governor), Mustafa Duman, Elif Haykır Hobikoğlu, Uğur Namık Küçük, Oğuzhan
Özbaş, Emrah Şener, Abdullah Yavaş.
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to keep the policy rate (one-week repo
auction rate) constant at 19 percent.
The global economy, having contracted sharply in 2020 due to the pandemic, continues to
recover on the back of accommodative policies and positive developments in the vaccination
process. This improvement process is determined especially by the acceleration in
manufacturing industry activity and global trade. While the upward trend in commodity prices
has decelerated, the effects of the rising global inflation expectations on international financial
markets remain significant.
Despite the constraining effect of the pandemic, domestic economic activity is strong, led by
domestic and external demand. Manufacturing industry activity exhibits a strong momentum,
whereas the weak course continues in the services sector, which has been adversely affected by
the pandemic restrictions. Nevertheless, risks for economic activity exist in either direction
depending on the progress of the pandemic and the vaccination process. Notwithstanding the
rise in exports and the fall in gold imports, strong domestic demand and commodity prices
continue to adversely affect the current account balance. While commercial loans exhibit a
moderate course, an upward trend is observed in consumer loan growth despite tightening
financial conditions.
Demand and cost factors, supply constraints in some sectors, and high levels of inflation
expectations continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior and inflation outlook. The
decelerating impact of the current monetary stance on credit and domestic demand is envisaged
to become more significant in the upcoming period. Accordingly, the MPC has decided to
maintain the tight monetary policy stance by keeping the policy rate unchanged.
The CBRT will continue to use decisively all available instruments in pursuit of the primary
objective of price stability. The policy rate will continue to be determined at a level above inflation
to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in
inflation and the medium-term 5 percent target is reached.
The stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability
positively through the fall in country risk premium, reversal in currency substitution,
accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and perpetual decline in financing costs. This would
create a viable foundation for investment, production and employment to continue growing in a
healthy and sustainable way.
The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data-driven
framework.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working
days.
1

