1 
  
Summary of the Monetary Policy 
Committee Meeting  
22 April  2021, No: 202 1-18  
Meeting Date : 15 April 2021 
Inflation Developments   
1. Consumer prices rose by 1.08% in March, and annual inflation increased by 0.58 points to 
16.19%. Annual inflation increased in energy, services and core goods groups, but declined 
in the food group. Against this background, annual inflation rates of B and C indices 
increased , and their trends  remained high  despite some decline.  
2. Prices of food and non -alcoholic beverages increased by 1.13 % in March, and the group's 
annual inflation fell by 0.96 points to 17.44 %. While  this was largely due to annual 
unprocess ed food inflation declining to 14.98%, annual processed food inflation rose slightly 
to 19.87% . The decline in annual unprocessed food inflation was led by the recently mild 
course  of fresh fruit and vegetable prices. Seasonally adjusted data indicate that  fruit and 
vegetable prices fell in March, while the increase in other unprocessed food prices slowed. 
After upswings in January and February, processed food prices continued to rise in March, 
albeit at a slower rate . International oil prices continued to rise , and domestic prices of fat s 
and oil s continued to climb, although at a slowing pace . Prices of international agricultural 
commodities, which have been on the rise for a long time, have recently displayed a more moderate outlook. Leading indicator s suggest that  annual food inflation continued to fall  in 
the first half of April.  
3. Rising by only 0.09%, e nergy prices remained largely unchanged in March, but the group's 
annual inflation rose by 3.61 points to 12.43 % due to the base effect. Bottled gas and 
natural gas prices increased by 2.81 % and 0.93 %, respectively,  in March, while fuel prices fell 
by 0.69 %. Despite the rise in international crude oil prices and exchange rate developments, 
their impact  on fuel prices was prevented by the sliding  scale system  and the price cap 
practice that helps this system to be more effective. Currently , the  sliding  scale system  
eliminates an important inflationary effect given  the direct and indirect effects of fuel prices. 
The upward trend in annual energy inflation  is expected to continue in April due to the base 
effect. 
4. Core goods prices rose by 1.39 % in March, and the group's annual inflation rose by 0.44 
points to 22.14 %. Annual inflation increased in clothing and footwear and other core goods, 
but declined slightly in durable goods.  Across other core goods, prices were notably higher 
in household repair -maintenance and personal care products  with high exchange rate pass -
through in addition to the lingering effect of adjustments to prices of medicine . Durable 
goods prices had a limited increase in March due to  supply constraints  and rising 
intern ational industrial metal prices . Furniture and automobile prices rose  in this period, 
while prices of electrical and non -electrical appliances decreased, eas ing the  rise in the 
group’s  prices.  
5. Prices of services increased by 1.26 % in March, and the group's annual inflation rose by 0.82 
points to 12.56 %. Annual inflation increased in restaurants -hotels, communication and other 
2 
 services, but followed a flat cour se in rents and transport  services.  With the easing of 
pandemic measures, restaurants -hotels prices increased significantly in March. Cost 
increases during the period when activities were interrupted passed through to prices, while 
the increasing demand , triggered  by capacity constraints , was another factor that put 
pressure on prices. Prices of communication services rose amid t he lingering  effects of the 
increases in the special communication tax. Among items grouped within other services, 
education and recreation  services diverged  negatively due to  sharp price increases. The 
increase in prices of recreation services was driven by the easing  of pandemic  measures. On 
the other hand, prices of education services increased on the back of the backward  
index ation in private school tuitions as well as the expiration of temporary VAT reductions.  
6. According to the results of the CBRT Survey of Expectations, participants’ inflation 
expectations have increased in April . While the current year -end inflation expectatio n 
increased by 1.58 points to 13.12% in April, the 12 -month ahead and 24 -month ahead 
inflation expectations rose by 0.79 points and 0.37 points to 11.26% and 9.55%, respectively.  
Factors Affecting Inflation and Risks  
7. The global economy, having contracted sharply in 2020 due to the pandemic, continues to recover on the back of accommodative policies and positive developments in the vaccination 
process. This improvement process is determined especially by the acceleration in 
manufacturing industry activity a nd global trade. However, despite ongoing vaccination 
efforts, risks to the global economic activity prevail due to uncertainties pertaining to the course of the pandemic. In this period, the upward trend in commodity prices has 
decelerated.  
8. In tandem with the recovery in expectations of growth in advanced economies, the effects of the rising global inflation expectations on international financial markets remain significant. 
Long -term bond rates lead to uncertainties about advanced economy monetary policies, and 
volatility in global financial markets. Nevertheless, the Committee maintained its assessment that global inflationary pressures might cause an earlier -than -projected tightening in 
monetary policies, and maintained its assessment that a period marked by increased data -
sensitivity and related volatilities in global financial markets was entered.  
9. Since the last MPC meeting, portfolio flows to emerging economies have continued at an accelerated rate in bond markets and at a milder pace in equity markets. The volatility in 
long -term bond rates in advanced economies keeps the risks to portfolio flows to emerging 
economies alive.  
10. Driven also by the exchange rate developments, producer prices posted a strong 
widespread increase in March. Commo dity prices have registered some deceleration in the 
recent period. However, inflationary effects arising from disruptions in supply chains persist.  
11. While commercial loans exhibit a moderate course, an upward trend is observed in 
consumer loan growth despi te tightening financial conditions. Noting that demand and cost -
side inflationary effects persisted, the Committee maintained its assessment that the risks to the year -end forecast target announced in the January Inflation Report were on the upside.  
12. Despit e the constraining effect of the pandemic, domestic economic activity is strong, led by 
domestic and external demand. In January -February period , industrial production rose by 
2.3% compared to the previous quarter, and continued to hover above its long -term trend 
despite the constraining effect of the pandemic in this period. The strong momentum in 
manufacturing industry activity has widely spread across sectors, being particularly 
significant in intermediate and durable consumer goods. On the other hand, t he weak 3 
 course continues in the services sector, which has been adversely affected by the pandemic 
restrictions.  
13. In February, nonfarm employment remained flat while total and nonfarm unemployment 
rates rose by 0.7 points to 13.4% and 15.3%, respectively, d ue to the increase in the 
participation rate. During this period, employment increased in the services and 
construction sectors, but decreased in the industry sector.  
14. Regarding the cyclical state of the economy, the data released for the first quarter indi cate 
that economic activity remains above the potential and aggregate demand conditions 
continue to be at inflationary levels.  While high- frequency data indicate that economic 
activity remains strong amid credit developments and controlled normalization, risks for economic activity exist in either direction depending on the progress of the pandemic and 
the vaccination process in the period ahead.  
15. Notwithstanding the rise in exports and the fall in gold imports, strong domestic demand and commodity prices c ontinue to adversely affect the current account balance. Provisional 
data suggest that imports increased in real terms along with price increases  in March. Gold 
imports, which started decelerating in the second half of January, have declined even below 
their historical averages in the recent period. This trend in gold imports limits the adverse 
effect of the terms of trade on the current account balance. Meanwhile, exports to both European and non -European countries are on the rise. Current trends indicate that the 
annualized current account balance will start to improve in the second quarter of this year. 
The Committee noted that tightened pandemic restrictions in some trading partners and 
supply problems in certain sectors, the automotive sector in particu lar, may constitute 
downside risk factors for the current account balance. The Committee underscored once 
again the importance of the course of the current account balance in terms of a lasting 
recovery in economic activity and financial stability.  
Monetary Policy  
16. The monetary policy stance will be set taking into account the upside risks to the inflation 
outlook and with a focus on bringing inflation down permanently in a cautious manner and 
achieving the price stability target. Accordingly, the policy stance will continue to be 
determined by taking into account inflation developments and inflation expectations, and at 
a degree of tightness that will restore the disinflation process as soon as possible and 
ensure its sustainability until the medium -term targets are achieved.  
17. Demand and cost factors, supply constraints in some sectors, and high levels of inflation expectations continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior and inflation outlook. The 
decelerating impact of the current monetary stance on  credit and domestic demand is 
envisaged to become more significant in the upcoming period. Accordingly, the Committee 
has decided to maintain the tight monetary policy stance by keeping the policy rate 
unchanged at 19%.  
18. The tight monetary stance will serv e as a significant buffer against external and temporary 
volatilities in the context of inflation expectations, pricing behavior and financial market 
developments.  
19. The CBRT will continue to use decisively all available instruments in pursuit of the primary  
objective of price stability. The policy rate will continue to be determined at a level above 
inflation to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until strong indicators point to a 
permanent fall in inflation and the medium -term 5% target is reached.  
20. The stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic sta bility and financial 
stability through the fall in country risk premium, reversal in currency substitution, 4 
 accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and perpetual decline in financing cos ts. This 
would create a viable foundation for investment, production and employment to continue 
growing in a healthy and sustainable way.  
21. Demand and cost -side effects remain significant for inflation given credit market and 
economic activity indicators, as  well as exchange rate volatility and developments in import 
prices. The outlook for domestic demand, international prices and global risk appetite 
heightens the risks arising from external financing needs to the balance of payments. In 
formulating the mon etary policy towards the target of price stability, the Committee will 
continue to follow an approach that also addresses the risks to financial stability.  
22. The Committee reiterated its judgement that in order to achieve price stability, a strong 
policy coordination and a holistic macro policy mix involving all stakeholders are required.  
23. The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data -
driven framework.  
 