Press Release on Interest Rates
17 June 2021

No: 2021-25

Participating Committee Members
Şahap Kavcıoğlu (Governor), Mustafa Duman, Elif Haykır Hobikoğlu, Uğur Namık Küçük, Emrah
Şener, Semih Tümen, Abdullah Yavaş.
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to keep the policy rate (one-week repo
auction rate) constant at 19 percent.
The worldwide speeding up of vaccination rollout, especially in developed countries, supports the
global economic recovery. Nonetheless, the increasing trend of commodity prices, supply
constraints in some sectors and the rise in transportation costs have led to producer and
consumer price increases internationally. The effects of the rising global inflation and inflation
expectations on international financial markets remain significant.
Domestic economic activity is strong. While domestic demand has slightly decelerated in the
second quarter due to pandemic restrictions and the tightening in financial conditions, external
demand remains strong. The acceleration of domestic vaccination rollout facilitates the recovery
in services and tourism sectors, which have been adversely affected by the pandemic, and leads
to a more balanced composition in economic activity. Loan growth exhibits a mild course owing
to the implemented monetary tightening. The course and composition of loans are monitored for
macroeconomic stability. Despite the rise in commodity prices, the strong upward trend in
exports, the slowdown in credit growth, the significant fall in gold imports and the strong
progress in the vaccination program stimulating tourism activities are expected to accelerate the
ongoing improvement in the current account balance.
In addition to the recent import-price-based cost factors, demand conditions, supply constraints
in some sectors, and high levels of inflation expectations continue to pose risks to the pricing
behavior and inflation outlook. On the other hand, the decelerating impact of the monetary
tightening on credit and domestic demand has begun to be observed. Taking into account the
high levels of inflation and inflation expectations, the current tight monetary policy stance will be
maintained decisively until the significant fall in the April Inflation Report’s forecast path is
achieved. Accordingly, the MPC has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged.
The CBRT will continue to use decisively all available instruments in pursuit of the primary
objective of price stability. The policy rate will continue to be determined at a level above inflation
to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in
inflation and the medium-term 5 percent target is reached.
The stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability
positively through the fall in country risk premium, reversal in currency substitution,
accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and perpetual decline in financing costs. This would
create a viable foundation for investment, production and employment to continue growing in a
healthy and sustainable way.
The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data-driven
framework.
1

The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working
days.

2

