Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
Hacı Bayram Mahallesi  
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06050 Ulus Altındağ / Ankara  
+90 (312) 507 50 00 
www.tcmb.gov.tr   
  
Press Release on Rediscount Credits for 
Export and Foreign Exchange Earning 
Services  
17 September 2021  No: 2021 -41 
 
The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey has changed the c onditions for utilization  and 
repayment of rediscount  credits for export and foreign exchange earning services .  
 
The c onditions for utilization  and repayment of rediscount credits for export and foreign 
exchange earning services have been changed  as follows,  to be effective from 1 October  2021 : 
The total rediscount credit limit has been increased to USD 30 billion. Of this limit, USD 20 billion 
is allocated to the credits to be extended via the Export Credit Bank of Turkey ( Turk Eximbank ), 
and USD 10 billion is allocated to the credits  to be  extended via other banks. T he Turkish lira 
equivalent of USD 5 billion of the aforementioned total limit can also be used for rediscount 
credits in Turkish lira.  
 Credits will be extended to net export er firms with an export amount that is at least 10% 
more than their import amount in the last three year s or the last year . 
 Credits can only be used for payments of the specified  expenditures  in Turkish lira.  
 Credit repayments will be made only with export proceeds.  
 The maximum maturity of credits has been updated to 180 days from 240 days.  For 
credits  that are extended  to finance  exports to new markets,  exports  of high technology 
products and foreign exchange earning services, the maximum maturity will remain as  
360 days.  
 The maximum commission rate s that can be charged by intermediary banks will be 100 
basis points.  
 For firms that make  a commitment to sell additional export proceeds to the CBRT, the 
interest rate applicable to  the credit will be discounted.  
 
 
Contact  
For further information, please  send an e -mail to basin@tcmb.gov.tr.  
 
