1 
  
 
 
Summary of the Monetary Policy 
Committee Meeting  
19 July 2021, No: 2021 -31  
Meeting Date: 14 July 2021  
Inflation Developments  
1. Consumer prices rose by 1.94% in June, and annual inflation increased by 0.94 points to 
17.53%. Annual inflation rose in food and core goods, but decreased in energy and services. 
Amid normalization steps, price increases were recorded in certain sectors t hat had 
experienced interruptions in their economic activities . Against this background, annual 
inflation rates and trends of the B and C indices registered an uptick.  
2. In June, prices of food and non -alcoholic beverages increased by 0.88% and the group’s 
annual inflation rose by 2.95 points to 19.99%. Annual inflation soared by 4.09 points to 
18.70% in the unprocessed food group, and rose by 1.71 points to 21.20% in the processed 
food group. Annual inflation remained flat in fresh fruits and vegetables with in the 
unprocessed food group, whereas it increased notably in the other unprocessed food group 
due to the hike s in red and white meat prices. Meanwhile, processed food prices were 
mostly driven by the bread and cereals group, processed meat products, fats  and oils and 
non-alcoholic beverages. Moreover, spikes in red meat prices and their spillover effects on 
the prices of meat products were notable  in June .  
3. Energy prices rose by 2.24% in June, while the group’s annual inflation declined by 0.43% 
points to 17.28%. With an upsurge of 6.33% due to the carry -over effects of the SCT rise  in 
May , fuel prices pulled energy prices up. Despite the adjustment in May, the sliding -scale 
system averts possible price increases .  On the other hand, electricity and natura l gas tariffs 
were increased  in July , and LPG also recorded an uptick in prices.  
4. Annual core goods inflation climbed by 1.08 points to 21.92% in June. Annual inflation 
increased across all subcategories, particularly in other core goods. In durable goods,  prices 
increased by 2.98%, while annual inflation crept up by 0.12 points to 30.86%. These figures 
were led mainly by the white goods and furniture sectors, while other electrical and non -
electrical appliances and automobile items also registered increase s. Exchange rate 
developments, soaring commodity prices and the disruptions in supply chains shaped the 
prices of durable goods and other core goods. Meanwhile, the clothing and footwear group, 
which registers decreasing prices in every June due to the arr ival of the sale season , saw 
monthly price increases in this period amid steps towards normalization. Annual inflation in 
clothing and footwear rose by 1.30 points to 6.86%, yet this level remained low and 
therefore continued to limit core goods inflation.   
5. In June , services prices increased by 1.94%, while annual services inflation edged down by 
0.16 points to 13.46%. The course of the group’s inflation was affected by the normalization 
steps taken both last year and this year. Annual inflation rose in res taurants -hotels, other 
services and rent, but declined in transport and communication services. In the restaurants -
2 
 hotels group, prices soared in the eat -out meals and accommodation items, and annual 
inflation in this group rose by 1.13 points to 18.86%. I n other services , amid reopening , 
annual inflation increased due to recreational and cultural services as well as maintenance 
and repair.  In June, transport services registered  price increases due to capacity restrictions 
in intercity passenger transport b y road, but annual inflation receded in this group due to 
the base effect.  
6. Inflation expectations obtained from the Survey of Market Participants are revised upwards 
in July. While the current year -end inflation expectation rose by 1.18 points to 15.64%, t he 
12-month ahead and 24 -month ahead inflation expectations increased by 0.50 points and 
0.27 points to 12.62% and 10.43%, respectively.   
Factors Affecting Inflation and Risks  
7. The worldwide speeding up of vaccination rollout, especially in developed countries, 
supports the global economic recovery. With the normalizations steps, the diver gence 
between services and industrial activities started to narrow  down . Nonetheless, economies 
advancing in their vaccination programs exhibit a stronger performance  in economic activity 
by easing the restrictions. On the other hand, some virus variants  recently  leading to 
resurge nce of cases  keep the uncertainties about the course of the pandemic in place.  
8. The strong recovery in the global demand, increasing trend o f commodity prices, supply 
constraints in some sectors and the rise in transportation costs have led to producer and 
consumer price increases interna tionally. The effects of the rising global inflation and 
inflation expectations on international financial markets remain significant.  Since the 
previous MPC Meeting, monthly and annual inflation in some developed economies have 
increased above expectations. The normalization process has started in emerging 
economies, where policy rates remain well below histor ical averages, and some central 
banks have delivered rate hikes. This outlook points to increased uncertainties and a slight 
tightening in global financial conditions compared to the previous MPC Meeting period. The 
fluctuating course of global risk appeti te and uncertainties regarding the course of long -
term bond rates lead to volatility in global financial markets. The Committee maintained its 
assessment that global inflationary pressures increase data -sensitivity in monetary policies 
and global financial  markets in turn, which may lead to volatilities.  
9. Portfolio inflows to emerging economies continued  in this MPC Meeting period on the back 
of bonds , albeit at a decelerated pace . Nonetheless, the volatility in long -term bond rates in 
advanced economies and the course of global financial conditions keep the risks to portfolio 
flows to emerging economies alive.   
10. Driven by international commodity prices , disruptions in supply chains,  as well as exchange 
rate developments, producer prices increased also in June. The rise in producer prices and 
the pressure it exerts on consumer prices have become more pronounced on a global scale, 
including advanced economies. On the other hand, the up ward trend in non -energy 
commodity prices has reversed since June, albeit to a limited extent.  
11. Commercial loan growth exhibits a mild course.  The effects of the implemented 
macroprudential measures will be monitored on personal loans, which recently displ ayed a 
rise due to the reopening and deferred demand. The Committee maintained its assessment 
that a milder growth in personal loans is critical to curb risks to the inflation outlook and 
external balance. Accordingly, the course and composition of loans a re closely  monitored 
for macroeconomic stability.  
12. Domestic economic activity is strong. While domestic demand has slightly decelerated in the 
second quarter due to pandemic restrictions and the tightening in financial conditions, 3 
 external demand remains st rong. In April -May period , industrial production increased by 
0.4% over the previous quarter. Industrial turnover indices suggest  that this  deceleration 
was driven by domestic demand due also to pandemic restrictions , while external demand 
was supportive of industrial production. In this period, the retail sales volume also went 
down amid restrictions.  
13. High -frequency data indicate that economic activity regained strength with the rapidly 
increasing mobility exceeding t he levels before the measures due to the speeding up of 
vaccination and easing of pandemic restrictions.  In fact, the weekly credit card expenditures 
data suggest that services sectors and retail trade items, which were affected more by the 
restrictions, r egistered higher rates of increases. The acceleration of domestic vaccination 
rollout facilitates the recovery in services and tourism sectors, which have been adversely 
affected by the pandemic, and leads to a more balanced composition in economic activit y. 
14. The impact of restrictions on economic activity was also reflected in the labor market. As of  
May, total and non -farm unemployment rates increased quarter -on-quarter by 0.5 points 
and 0.7 points to 13.5% and 15.6%, respectively. High -frequency data sugg est a rapid 
recovery in job opportunities following the easing of restrictions. In this respect, it is 
assessed that there may be employment increases in the services sector in the upcoming 
period. However, the rise in the labor force participation rates m ay limit the impact of 
employment increases on unemployment rates.    
15. Favorable external demand conditions and the current tight monetary policy impact the 
current account balance positively. The current account balance ran a deficit of USD 3.1 
billion in May,  while  the annual deficit decreased by USD 0.9 billion to USD 31.9 billion 
compared to the previous month. According to preliminary foreign trade data for June, 
seasonally -adjusted exports and imports excluding gold increased on a monthly basis. 
Despit e the rise in commodity prices, the current account is expected to post a surplus in 
the rest of the year due to the strong upward trend in exports, and the strong progress in 
the vaccination program stimulating tourism activities. The Committee maintained  its 
emphasis on the importance of the course of the current account balance in terms of a 
lasting recovery in economic activity and financial stability.     
Monetary Policy  
16. The monetary policy stance will be set taking into account the upside risks to the inflation 
outlook and with a focus on bringing inflation down permanently in a cautious manner and 
achieving the price stability target. Accordingly, the policy stance will continue to be 
determined by taking into account inflation developments and inflati on expectations, and at 
a degree of tightness that will restore the disinflation process as soon as possible and 
ensure its sustainability until the medium -term targets are achieved.  
17. In addition to the recent increases in import prices and administered pri ces, demand 
conditions, supply constraints in some sectors, possible volatility in inflation during the 
summer due to the reopening, and high levels of inflation expectations continue to pose 
risks to the pricing behavior and inflation outlook. On the othe r hand, the decelerating 
impact of the monetary tightening on credit and domestic demand is being observed. Taking 
into account the high levels of inflation and inflation expectations, the current tight 
monetary policy stance will be maintained decisively until the significant fall in the April 
Inflation Report’s forecast path is achieved. Accordingly, the MPC has decided to keep the 
policy rate unchanged at 19%.  
18. Inflation is expected to follow a volatile course in the short term d ue to various supply and 
demand side factors, with commodity prices and administered prices in the lead . The impact 4 
 of possible short -term volatilities in inflation on the underlying trend will be monitored 
closely for the monetary policy stance. The tight monetary stance will serv e as a significant 
buffer against external and temporary volatilities in the context of inflation expectations, 
pricing behavior and financial market developments.  
19. The CBRT will continue to use decisively all available instruments in pursuit of the primary  
objective of price stability. The policy rate will continue to be determined at a level above 
inflation to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until strong indicators point to a 
permanent fall in inflati on and the medium -term 5%  target is reached.  
20. The stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial 
stability positively through the fall in country risk premium, reversal in currency substitution, 
accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and perpetual decline in fi nancing costs. This 
would create a viable foundation for investment, production and employment to continue 
growing in a healthy and sustainable way.  
21. Demand and cost -side effects remain significant for inflation given credit market and 
economic activity indicators, as well as exchange rate volatility and developments in import 
prices. While t he current tight monetary p olicy  keeps demand -side factors under control by 
containing loans  and domestic demand, it also supports the improvement in the current 
account balance. Nevertheless, the outlook for monetary policies in advanced economies 
and global risk appetite heighten the risks to the portfolio flows to wards  emerging 
economies. In formulating the monetary policy towards the target of price stability, the 
Committee will continue to follow an approach that also addresses the risks to financial 
stability.  
22. The Committee reiterated its judgement that in order  to achieve price stability, a strong 
policy coordination and a holistic macro policy mix involving all stakeholders are required.  
23. The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data -
driven framework.  