Press Release on Interest Rates
21 October 2021

No: 2021-45

Participating Committee Members
Şahap Kavcıoğlu (Governor), Taha Çakmak, Mustafa Duman, Elif Haykır Hobikoğlu, Emrah Şener,
Yusuf Tuna.
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to reduce the policy rate (one-week repo
auction rate) from 18 percent to 16 percent.
Despite the recovery in global economic activity in the first half of the year, recently published
confidence indices have started to decline due to the effect of the pandemic. Nonetheless,
despite the increase in the vaccination rate, new variants keep the downside risks to global
economic activity alive. Recovery in global demand, high course of commodity prices, supply
constraints in some sectors and rise in transportation costs have led to producer and consumer
price increases internationally. Unfavorable effects of weather conditions in major agricultural
commodity exporting countries are observed on global food prices. While the effects of high
global inflation on inflation expectations and international financial markets are closely
monitored, central banks in advanced economies assess that the rise in inflation would be mostly
temporary along with normalization in demand composition, easing of supply constraints and
waning base effects. Accordingly, central banks in advanced economies continue their supportive
monetary stances and asset purchase programs.
Leading indicators show that domestic economic activity remains strong, with the help of robust
external demand. The spread of domestic vaccination throughout the society facilitates the
recovery in services, tourism and related sectors, which have been adversely affected by the
pandemic, and leads to a more balanced composition in economic activity. While the demand for
durable consumer goods slows down, a recovery is observed in non-durable consumer goods.
The improvement in annualized current account is expected to continue in the rest of the year
due to the strong upward trend in exports, and the strengthening of this trend is important for
the price stability objective.
Recent increase in inflation has been driven by supply side factors such as rise in food and
import prices, especially in energy, and supply constraints, increase in administered prices and
demand developments due to the reopening. It is assessed that these effects are due to
transitory factors. On the other hand, the decelerating impact of the monetary tightening on
credit and domestic demand is being observed. The tightness in monetary stance has started to
have a higher than envisaged contractionary effect on commercial loans. In addition,
strengthened macroprudential policy framework has started to curb personal loan growth. The
Committee evaluated the analyses to decompose the impact of demand factors that monetary
policy can have an effect, core inflation developments and supply shocks. Accordingly the
Committee decided to reduce the policy rate by 200 basis points to 16 percent. Nevertheless, the
Committee assessed that, till the end of the year, supply-side transitory factors leave limited
room for the downward adjustment to the policy rate.

1

In order to contain climate-based and other environmental risks, the Committee also decided to
support sustainable finance initiatives as a long-term policy without prejudice to the main
objectives of monetary policy.
The CBRT will continue to use decisively all available instruments until strong indicators point to a
permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the
primary objective of price stability. Stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic
stability and financial stability through the fall in country risk premium, continuation of the
reversal in currency substitution and the upward trend in foreign exchange reserves, and durable
decline in financing costs. This would create a viable foundation for investment, production and
employment to continue growing in a healthy and sustainable way.
The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data-driven
framework.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working
days.

2

