   
Press Release on Interest Rates  
18 February 2021  No: 2021-09 
 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Naci Ağbal (Governor), Murat Çetinkaya, Ömer Duman, Uğur Namık Küçük, Oğuzhan Özbaş, 
Emrah Şener, Abdullah Yavaş.  
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to keep the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) constant at 17 percent.  
Economic activity is on a strong course. While the downward effects of the pandemic -related 
restrictio ns on the economy have been limited , the slowdown in activity in services and related 
sectors and uncertainties surrounding the short -run outlook of these sectors prevail. The 
strengthening domestic demand, due to the cumulative effects of high credit grow th during the 
pandemic, continues to have an adverse effect on the current account balance. Nevertheless, 
credit growth has started to slow down amid tighter financial conditions.  
Domestic demand conditions, cumulative cost effects, in particular the excha nge rate effects, 
increasing international food and other commodity prices and high levels of inflation 
expectations continue to affect the pricing behavior and inflation outlook adversely. The 
decelerating impact of the strong monetary tightening on credi t and domestic demand is 
expected to become more significant; hence the effects of demand and cost factors on inflation 
are envisaged to wane gradually. On the other hand, the ongoing upward trend in international 
commodity prices, supply constraints inten sifying in some sectors, and the adjustments in wage 
and administered prices maintain their importance for the medium -term inflation outlook. 
Accordingly, the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained decisively , taking into account 
the end -2021 fore cast target, for an extended period until strong indicators point to a permanent 
fall in inflation and price stability. In regard to the indicators pointing to a permanent fall in 
inflation and price stability, indicators for the underlying trend of inflat ion and pricing behavior, 
diffusion indices, demand and cost factors, and inflation expectations are monitored closely for 
their compatibility with the targets in the forecast horizon. Additional monetary tightening will be 
delivered if needed.   
The balance between the monetary policy rate and actual/expected inflation will be sustained 
decisively to maintain a strong disinflationary effect  until permanent price stability and the 5 
percent target are reached . Sustaining the  tight monetary policy stanc e in such a manner , 
besides attaining permanent price stability, will foster macroeconomic and financial stability 
positively by facilitating the fall in country risk premium, the reversal in currency substitution, the 
accumulation of foreign exchange rese rves and the perpetual decline in financing costs.  
In its decision -making process, the CBRT adopts a framework with a medium term perspective, 
based on analyzing all factors affecting inflation and the interaction between these factors. It 
should be emphas ized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its 
stance.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working 
days.  
