Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey Head Office  
Hacı Bayram  Mah. İstiklal Cad. No:10 06050  
Ulus Altındağ Ankara  
Phone :  (+90 312)  507 50 00  Fax : (+90 312) 507 56 40  
www.tcmb.gov.tr   
Press Release on Unauthorized 
Payment Service Providers  
10 September  2021  No: 2021 -38 
 
The CBRT is assigned  with the  duty  to regulate and supervise payment s in accordance with the  
Law no. 6493  on Payment And Secur ities Settlement Systems, Payment Servi ces and Electronic 
Money Insti tutions. 
Recently, n otifications  and complaints have been filed  that some businesses and individuals are 
acting as inter media ries in  money transfer and bill payment services without the permi t and 
authorization required by the relevant legislation, and that money is being collected from third 
parties for this purpose.  There are numerous reports that the collected funds are not  being  used 
in payments , leading t o unjust treatment . 
Providing payment services in our country is  allowed only  after obtain ing the required licenses . 
Payment services can be provided by banks, the Post and Telegraph Organization Inc. (PTT)  as 
well as  payment institutions and ele ctronic money institutions that hold  operating licenses . 
Institutions  authorized to be inter media ries in  money transfer s, bill payments and similar 
payment services are announced * on the CBRT website. Persons who cannot be definitely shown 
to have the authoriz ation to provide pa yment services should not be reli ed on and no payments 
should be made through the ir inter mediation . 
In addition,  provid ing payment services is against the law  except for  banks, the PTT as well as the 
listed payment and electronic money insti tutions and their representatives. The CBRT appli es to 
the relevant Chief Public Prosecutor's Offices to ensure that investigations and pro ceedings are 
commenced  against businesses and individuals operating without permi ts. Avoiding payment 
services other than authorized institutions and organizations and notifying the CBRT  of the 
allegations of illegal payment services will  help to  prevent possible unjust treatment . 
Reporting businesses and individuals acting as payment and electronic money institutions or  
their authorized representatives without the required  licenses, permi ts and authorizations  
through the Co ntact Us  (For Your Questions ) tab on the CBRT  website  or the Ask the CBRT 
(TCMB’ye Sorun, in Turkish ) tab on the e-Government  website  is important to help the CBRT  to 
apply  to the Chief Public Prosecutor's Office.  
*  Authorized  Payment Institutions   
 Authorized  Electronic Money Institutions  
 
 
Contact  
For further information, please  send  an e -mail to basin@tcmb.gov.tr.  
