1 
  
Summary of the Monetary Policy  
Committee Meeting  
24 June 2021, No: 2021 -26  
Meeting Date: 17 June 2021  
Inflation Developments  
1. Consumer prices rose by 0.89% in May, while annual inflation decreased by 0.55 points to 
16.59%. Annual inflation receded in energy and core goods; remained relatively flat in the 
food group and increased in services. In this period, lockdown measures led to interruptions 
in economic activity in certain se ctors, which recorded only limited price increa ses, in turn. 
Against this background, annual inflation rates and trends of B and C indices registered 
some decline, maintaining their high levels.  
2. In May, prices of food and non -alcoholic beverages increased  by 0.29% and the group’s 
annual inflation crept up by 0.06 points to 17.04%. Annual inflation edged down by 0.06 
points to 14.61% in the unprocessed food group, but rose by 0.13 points to 19.49% in the 
processed food group. Annual inflation receded in fre sh fruits and vegetables within  the 
unprocessed food group, whereas it increased in the other unprocessed food group due to  
the hike in red meat prices. Meanwhile, processed food prices registered a monthly increase 
of 0.87%. Prices in the bread and cereals group rose by 1.00%, while non -alcoholic 
bevera ges stood out among other processed food. Moreover, increase in raw milk re ference 
prices became another factor to keep risks to food inflation brisk.  The uptrend in 
international food and agricultural commodity prices accelerated in May, and price hikes 
spread across all subcategories, with cereals and fats  and oils in the lead.   
3. Energy prices rose by 1.50% in May, while the group’s annual inflation declined by 0.73% to 
17.71%. This is attributed to fuel prices that increased by 3.84% due to the uptick in 
international crude oil prices and exchange rate developments accompanied b y 
adjustments in the sliding -scale system and termination  of the price cap practice. It is 
considered that fuel prices will increase also in June amid  the carry -over effects of the SCT 
rise in May, yet the high base effect will cause annual energy inflation to decline further. It 
should be emphasiz ed that despite the recent adjustments, the sliding -scale practice 
continues to limit price increases  both directly and ind irectly.  
4. Prices of core goods rose by 0.86% in May and annual core goods inflation decreased by 
2.29% to 20.84%. Annual inflation decreased across all subcategories, particularly in clothing 
and footwear. The recent trend of upsurge in the clothing  and footwear group lost sizeable 
momentum due to lockdown  effects , and annual inflation declined by 5.40 points to 5.56%. 
In durable goods, prices increased by 0.91%, while annual inflation decreased by 1.76 points, 
yet remained high at 30.74%. In addition to int ernational commodity prices, exchange rate 
effects were visible in automobile and furniture items, while the mild course in electrical and 
non-electrical appliances limited the inflation .  
5. In May, services prices increased by 1.18%, and annual services inf lation rose by 0.5 0 points 
to 13.62%. Annual inflation  surged in transport services; rose by a more limited rate in 
restaurants -hotels, communication and rent; and  declined somewhat in other services. The 
2 
 surge in annual transport services inflation is att ributed  also to the increases in intercity bus 
fares due to capacity constraints led by pandemic measures. Price increases in the 
restaurants -hotels group remained quite moderate due to lockdown, while annual inflation 
maintained its uptrend owing to the low base.   
6. Inflation expectati ons of market participants increased in June. While the current year -end 
inflation expectation rose by 0.65 points to 14.46%, the 12 -month ahead and 24 -month 
ahead inflation expectations increased by 0.31 points and 0.17 points to 12.12% and 10.16%, 
respec tively.   
Factors Affecting Inflation and Risks  
7. The worldwide speeding up of vaccination rollout, especially in developed countries, 
supports the global economic recovery . Accelerat ed activity  in the manufacturing industry 
and global trade as well as improv ements in services bolst er this recovery process . 
Pandemic -led downside risks to the global economic performance  are reduced amid 
ongoing vaccination efforts . 
8. The increasing trend of commodity prices, supply constraints in some sectors and the rise in 
transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally. The 
effects of the rising global inflation and inflation expectations on international financial 
markets remain significant . Since the previous MPC Meeting, the expecta tions of policy rate 
hike have been brought forward in tandem with the median expectations of the FOMC 
members, while inflation projections have also increased. The normalization process has 
started in emerging economies, where policy rates remain well bel ow historical averages . 
This outlook points to increased uncertainties and a slight  tight ening  in global financial 
conditions compared to the previous MPC Meeting period. Uncertainties regarding the 
course of long -term bond rates lead to volatility in global financial markets.  The Committee 
maintained its assessment that global inflationary pressures increase data -sensitivity in 
monetary policies and global financial markets in turn, which may lead to volatilities.  
9. Since the last MPC meeting, portfolio inflows to emerging economies have been favorable in 
both bond markets and equity markets. Nonetheless , the volatility in long -term bond rates 
in advanced economies and the course of global financial conditions keep th e risks to 
portfolio flows to emerging economies alive.   
10. Driven by international commodity prices, exchange rate developments and supply 
constraints, producer prices recorded a high rate of increase also in May, which spread 
across the sectors. Although non-energy commodity prices displayed a slightly  favorable 
outlook in June, it is considered that cost pressures on consumer prices have remained 
strong  because of the depreciation in the Turkish lira and cumulative effects . 
11. Loan growth exhibits a mild cours e owing to the monetary tightening. However, short -term 
trends show that retail loan utilization has  increased notably owing also to the deferred 
demand because of pandemic -led restrictions. The Committee assessed that a milder 
growth in retail loans is critical to curb risks to the inflation outlook and external balance. 
Accordingly, the course and composition of loans are monitored for macroeconomic 
stability.  
12. Domestic economic activity is strong. Having increased by 7.0% annually and 1.7% quarterly 
in the first quarter of 2021, GDP confirmed the past evaluations of economic activity being 
above its potential despite the restraining effects of the pandemic. In this period, final 
domestic demand slowed down due to private consumption, while total investmen ts and 
net exports made a positive contribution to the quarterly growth. On the production side,  3 
 while the industrial and construction value -added  were the main determinant of quart erly 
growth, the services value -added made a limited contribution to growth  due to pandemic -
led restrictions.  
13. While domestic demand has slightly decelerated in the second quarter due to pandemic 
restrictions and the tightening in financial conditions, external demand remains strong. The 
April readings of industrial production , turnover index and retail sales volume index 
revealed that the measures taken to prevent the spread of the pandemic as of mid -April 
restricted the economic activity. In April, the industrial production index decreased by 0.9% 
month -on-month and 0.3% quarter -on-quarter. Industrial turnover indices suggested that 
the slowdown in this period was driven by domestic demand. Likewise, while the services 
turnover index declined due to accommodation and catering services, the retail sales 
volume also went down amid r estrictions.  
14. High -frequency data indicate that the additional pandemic measures announced for the 29 
April -17 May 2021 period continued to slow down economic activity , and that, along with the 
gradual normalization steps, the rapidly increasing mobility exceeding the levels before the 
measures, point to a significant recovery in economic activity  in the subsequent period . In 
fact, the weekly credit card expenditures data suggest that services sectors and retail trade 
items,  which were affected more by the restrictions, registered substantial increases starting 
from the second half of May. For the period ahead, the acceleration of domestic vaccination 
rollout facilitates the recovery in services and tourism sectors, which hav e been adversely 
affected by the pandemic, and leads to a more balanced composition in economic activity.  
15. The impact of restrictions on economic activity was also reflected in the labor market. While 
non-farm employment dropped by 1.1% in April over the p revious month, the total 
unemployment rate rose by 0.9 points to 13.9%. High -frequency data suggest a rapid 
recovery in job opportunities and labor force participation rates following the easing of 
restrictions. In this respect, it is assessed that there m ay be employment increases in the 
services sector in the upcoming period. However, the rise in the labor force participation 
rates may limit the impact of employment increases on unemployment rates.  
16. In April, the seasonally -adjusted current account balanc e started to improv e. According to 
preliminary foreign trade data for May, seasonally -adjusted exports and imports excluding 
gold increased on a monthly basis. Despite the rise in commodity prices, the strong upward 
trend in exports, the slowdown in credit  growth, the significant fall in gold imports and the 
strong progress in the vaccination program stimulating tourism activities are expected to 
accelerate the ongoing improvement in the current account balance.  The Committee 
maintained its emphasis on the importance of the course of the current account balance in 
terms of a lasting recovery in economic activity and financial stability.  
Monetary Policy  
17. The monetary policy stance will be set taking into account the upside risks to the inflation 
outlook and with a focus on bringing inflation down permanently in a cautious manner and 
achieving the price stability target. Accordingly, the policy stance will continue to be 
determined by taking into account inflation developments and inflation expectations, and a t 
a degree of tightness that will restore the disinflation process as soon as possible and 
ensure its sustainability until the medium -term targets are achieved.  
18. In addition to the recent import -price -based cost factors, demand conditions, supply 
constraint s in some sectors, and high levels of inflation expectations continue to pose risks 
to the pricing behavior and inflation outlook. On the other hand, the decelerating impact of 
the monetary tightening on credit and domestic demand has begun to be observed.  Taking 4 
 into account the high levels of inflation and inflation expectations, the current tight 
monetary policy stance will be maintained decisively until the significant fall in the April 
Inflation Report’s forecast path is achieved. Accordingly, the Comm ittee has decided to keep 
the policy rate unchanged at 19%.  
19. Inflation is expected to follow a volatile course in the short term due to various supply  and 
demand side factors, with commodity prices in the lead. The tight monetary stance will serve 
as a significant buffer against external and temporary volatilities in the context of inflation 
expectations, pricing behavior and financial market developments . 
20. The CBRT will continue to use decisively all available instruments in pursuit of the primary 
object ive of price stability. The policy rate will continue to be determined at a level above 
inflation to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until strong indicators point to a 
permanent fall in inflation and the medium -term 5% target is reached.  
21. The stabi lity in the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial 
stability positively through the fall in country risk premium, reversal in currency substitution, 
accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and perpetual decline in financing  costs. This 
would create a viable foundation for investment, production and employment to continue 
growing in a healthy and sustainable way.  
22. Demand and cost -side effects remain significant for inflation given credit market and 
economic activity indicators , as well as exchange rate volatility and developments in import 
prices. The ongoing improvement in the current account balance is expected to become 
more evident in the upcoming months  due to  the developments in foreign trade and 
tourism . On the other han d, the outlook for domestic demand, international prices and 
global risk appetite heightens the risks arising from external financing needs to the balance 
of payments. In formulating the monetary policy towards the target of price stability, the 
Committee will continue to follow an approach that also addresses the risks to financial 
stability.  
23. The Committee reiterated its judgement that in order to achieve price stability, a strong 
policy coordination and a holistic macro policy mix involving all stakeholde rs are required.  
24. The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data -
driven framework.  
 
 
 
  
 