1 
  
Press Release on Interest Rates  
22 September  2022 No: 2022-38 
 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Şahap Kavcıoğlu (Governor), Taha Çakmak, Mustafa Duman, Elif Haykır Hobikoğlu, Emrah Şener, 
Yusuf Tuna.  
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to reduce the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) from 1 3 percent to  12 percent.  
The weakening  effect s of geopolitical risks on global economic activity continue to increase . 
Global g rowth forecasts for the upcoming period are be ing revised downwards  and recession is 
increasingly assessed as  an inevitable risk factor . While  the negative consequences of supply 
constraints in some sectors, particularly basic food, have been alleviated by the strategic 
solution s facilitated  by Türkiye, the upward trend in producer and consumer price s continues on 
an international scale . The effects of high global inflation  on inflation expectations and 
international financial markets are closely monitored.  Moreover, central banks in advanced 
economies emphasize  that the rise in inflation may last longer than previously anticipated due to 
rising energy prices , imbalances between supply and demand , and rigidities in labor market s. 
The divergence in monetary p olicy steps and communications of central banks in advanced 
economies continue  due to their diverse economic outlook. It is observed that central banks 
continue  their efforts to develop new supportive  measures  and tools to cope with the increasing 
uncertainties in financial markets .  
A strong growth was observed  in the first half of 2022 . Since the beginning of July , leading 
indicators have been point ing to a slowdown in growth due to the weakening foreign demand.  
Compared to peer  economies , job creation has been stronger . Considering the sectors that 
contribute to  the employment  increase , it is observed  that the growth dynamics are supported 
by structural gains. While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, the 
stronger than expected contribution of tourism  revenues  to the current account balance 
continues. On the other hand, high course of energy prices and the likelihood of a recession in 
main trade partners keep the risks on current account balance  alive.  Sustainable c urrent account 
balance is important for price stability. The rate of c redit growth  and allocation  of funds for real 
economic activity purposes are closely monitored. In addition, the spread between policy  rate 
and the loan interest rate s driven by the announced macroprudential measures is closely 
monitored . The Committee will continue  to further strengthen the tools supporting  the 
effectiveness of the monetary transmission mechanism .  
Increase in inflation is driven by the lagged and indirect effects of rising energy costs resulting 
from geopolitical developments, effects of pricing formations that are not supported by 
economic fundamentals, strong negative supply shocks caused by the rise in global energy, food 
and agri cultural commodity prices. The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the 
back of measures  taken and decisively implemented  for strengthening  sustainable price and 
financial stability along with the resolution of the ongoing regional conflict . Additionally, leading 
indicators for the third quarter continue point ing to loss of momentum in economic activity  due 
to the decreasing foreign demand . It is important that financial condition s remain supportive to 
2 
 preserve the growth momentum in industria l production and the positive trend in employment  
in a period of increasing uncer tainties regarding global growth as well as escalating geopolitical 
risk. Accordingly, the Committee has decided to reduce the policy rate by 100 basis points , and  
has assessed that  the updated level of policy rate is adequate  under the current outlook . To 
create an institutional basis for sustainable price stability, the comprehensive review of the policy 
framework continues with the aim of encouraging permanent an d strengthened liraization in all 
policy tools of the CBRT . The credit, collateral and liquidity policy actions, of which the review 
process is finalized, will continue to be implemented  to strengthen the effectiveness of the 
monetary policy transmission mechanism.  
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively within the framework of 
liraization strategy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium -
term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the pri mary objective of price stability. Stability in 
the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability through the fall 
in country risk premium, continuation of the reversal in currency substitution and the upward 
trend in fore ign exchange reserves, and durable decline in financing costs. This would create a 
viable foundation for investment, production and employment to continue growing in a healthy 
and sustainable way.  
The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a tran sparent, predictable and data -driven 
framework.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working 
days.  