1 
  
Summary of the Monetary Policy 
Committee Meeting  
27 October  2022, No: 2022 -44  
  Meeting Date : 20 October  2022  
Inflation Developments  
1. Consumer prices rose by 3.08% in September and annual inflation increased by 3.24 points 
to 83.45%. In this period, annual inflation decreased somewhat in the alcohol -tobacco- gold 
group whereas it went up in other groups.  The most significant contribution to the rise in 
inflation came from energy and s ervices groups. While the rise in energy inflation was driven 
by developments in items with administered prices such as electricity, natural gas, and municipal water as well as in solid fuel prices, fuel and bottled gas prices decreased in 
tandem with inte rnational crude oil prices. In September, annual inflation increased in 
services and food groups. In the core goods group, annual inflation decreased in durable 
goods while it rose in other subgroups. As the domestic energy prices were affected by 
natural gas prices that remained elevated due to geopolitical developments, the rise in 
producer prices accelerated driven by electricity production and gas manufacturing. Against this background, the seasonally adjusted  monthly change in B and C indices decelerat ed 
somewhat while their annual inflation continued to  increase.  
2. Prices of food and non -alcoholic beverages increased by 1.97% in September, and annual 
inflation rose by 2.80 points to 93.05% in this group. Annual inflation increased  by 2.88 and 
2.52 points  to 82.39% and 102.90% in unprocessed and processed food, respectively. In 
unprocessed food, seasonally -adjusted data pointed to an upsurge in prices of fresh fruits 
and vegetables on the back of fresh fruit prices in September. In other unprocessed food, 
price hikes were notable for rice,  eggs and nuts, while p otato and red meat prices decreased.
 
The increase in processed food prices was driven by bread and cereals as well as canned 
vegetables and sugar -related products.  
3. Energy prices surged by 7.39% in Se ptember and annual inflation in this group rose by 11.25 
points to 132.98%. This was mainly driven by natural gas and electricity prices, which soared 
by 20.98% and 20.00%, respectively as a result of the changes in the residential tariffs. 
Meanwhile, muni cipal water and solid fuel prices also posted large increases. On the other 
hand, fuel oil and bottled gas prices decreased in this period following the decline in international crude oil prices.  
4. Services prices were up by 3.90% in September, and the group 's annual inflation increased by 
3.46 points to 57.76%. In this period, annual inflation increased across all subgroups, most 
visibly in transport services and rents. The rise in transport prices was mainly led by price 
hikes in urban passenger transport by bus due to school bus fares as well as in passenger transport by air and railway, despite the decline in the fares of intercity passenger transport 
by road. Against this backdrop, prices in transport went up by 6.95%, pushing annual inflation 
up by 7.69 points to 97.98%. Rents posted a monthly increase of 5.45%, and seasonally -
adjusted data pointed to a continued acceleration trend. In the other services subgroup, the most significant items were education services due to the ongoing rises in university tu ition 
2 
 fees and insurance services due to compulsory vehicle insurance. In the restaurants- hotels 
subgroup, prices increased at a more moderate pace compared to previous months, and 
annual inflation in this subgroup edged up by 0.39 points to 81.34%.  
5. In Se ptember, annual inflation in core goods rose by 0.58 points to 77.49%. The 0.98% 
increase in prices of durable goods was led by electric and non -electric appliances, whereas 
the decline in furniture prices had a positive contribution. Thus, annual inflatio n in durable 
goods fell by 1.83 points to 89.96%. Due to the start of the new season, annual inflation in the 
clothing and footwear group increased by 2.24 points to 39.62%. In the other core goods 
subgroup, personal care products and household- related cle aning materials stood out, and 
the annual inflation in this group rose by 2.62 points to 82.74%.  
6. According to the October results of the Survey of Market Participants, current year -end 
inflation expectations remained relatively flat at 67.78%, while 12 -mon th ahead inflation 
expectations increased slightly by 0.60 points to 37.34%. Meanwhile, 24 -month ahead 
inflation expectations stood at 21.17%.  
Factors Affecting Inflation and Risk s  
7. The weakening effects of geopolitical risks on global economic activity continue to increase. Global growth forecasts for the upcoming period are being revised downwards and recession 
is increasingly assessed as an inevitable risk factor.  
8. While the negative consequences of supply constraints in some sectors, particularly basic  
food, have been alleviated by the strategic solutions facilitated by Türkiye, the upward trend 
in producer and consumer prices continues on an international scale. The effects of high 
global inflation on inflation expectations and international financial markets are closely 
monitored. Moreover, central banks in advanced economies emphasize that the rise in 
inflation may last longer than previously anticipated due to rising energy prices, imbalances 
between supply and demand, and rigidities in labor markets . The divergence in monetary 
policy steps and communications of central banks in advanced economies continue to increase due to their diverse economic outlook. It is observed that central banks continue 
their efforts to develop new supportive measures and tools to cope with the increasing 
uncertainties in financial markets.  
9. Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets have both continued to register outflows in October in line with the global risk appetite. Moreover, the 
volatili ty in the long -term bond yields in advanced economies and the course of global 
financial conditions keep the risks to portfolio flows to emerging economies alive.  
10. Due to the impact of the policy steps taken within the scope of the liraization strategy, 
Türkiye's Turkish lira -denominated government bond yields, especially in long maturities, 
performed more favorably in this period compared to peer economies.  
11. Increase in inflation is driven by the lagged and indirect effects of rising energy costs resulting 
from geopolitical developments, effects of pricing formations that are not supported by 
economic fundamentals, strong negative supply shocks caused by the rise in global energy, food and agricultural commodity prices.  
12. Despite moderate international commodit y prices and transportation costs, natural gas 
prices that remained elevated due to geopolitical developments,  affected domestic energy 
prices, leading to an increase in annual producer inflation driven by electricity production and 
gas manufacturing. Acco rding to the main industrial groupings, annual inflation increased 
across subcategories, more markedly in energy and non -durable consumption goods. Across 
sectors, in addition to electricity production and gas manufacturing, which recorded 
significant pric e increases amid high international natural gas prices, water treatment and 3 
 distribution, clothing, coal -lignite, beverages and construction -related products also saw 
notable price hikes. Meanwhile, seasonally -adjusted underlying trend indicators for produ cer 
prices pointed that cost -based price pressures persisted, albeit at a weaker rate.  
13. A strong growth was observed in the first half of 2022. Leading indicators for the second half 
of the year continue pointing to a slowdown in growth due to the weakening  foreign demand.  
While industrial production increased by 2.4 percent in August, adjusted for seasonal and 
calendar effects, compared to the previous month, it increased by 4.1 percent on an annual 
basis.  Thus, the monthly production loss in the previous m onth due to bridge days was 
partially compensated. After growing by 1.9% and 0.9% in the first two quarters of the year, respectively, industrial production dropped by 3.9% in the third quarter as of August. In this 
period, the quarterly decline in industr ial production spread across all manufacturing sectors 
except vehicles. The retail sales volume index increased quarter -on-quarter in August, but the 
quarterly growth rate slowed. Similarly, the quarterly increase in credit card spending lost 
momentum in t he third quarter.  
14. Pressures on the manufacturing industry due to foreign demand and their currently limited impact on domestic demand and supply capacity are being monitored closely. Survey -based 
indicators such as Business Tendency Survey, PMI and sectoral confidence indic es as well as 
other high -frequency data point to a continued slowdown in economic activity.  Registered 
domestic and external orders and future order expectations of manufacturing industry firms reveals a n ongoing weakening in total demand, which is more pronounced for external 
demand. Firms' investment and employment expectations declined as of September  
compared to the second quarter. Information obtained from field interviews also confirm this 
outlook for the economic activity in this period . 
15. As of August, the quarterly employment growth slowed down in the third quarter in tandem  
with the decelerating  economic activity. The s easonally -adjusted employment as per the 
averages of July and August increased by 0.4 % (116 thousand people) compared to the 
previous quarter, and stood  approximately 3.4 million people above its  pre-pandemic level 
(February 2020). Nevertheless, th is rate of increase remained  below the quarterly 
employment growth in the first two quarters  of 20 22 (0.7 % and 2.5 %, respectively). 
Meanwhile , compared to peer economies, job creation has been stronger. Considering the 
sectors that contribute to the employment increase, it is observed that the growth dynamics 
are supported by structural gains.  The seasonally adjusted labor force participation rate  on a 
quarterly basis , which fell by 0.4 points to 52.8 % as of August, is a pproximately  2 points 
above its pre- pandemic level. An evaluation  on a monthly basis  indicates that  the downward 
effect of the August  employment growth  exceeded the upward effect of the increase in labor 
force participation on the unemployment rate. Thus, the unemployment rate declined by 0.4 
points compared to previous month and realized as  9.6%. Survey indicators and high -
frequency da ta indicate that the upward trend in employment remains in place, albeit with a 
loss of momentum.  
16. The strong course of energy and gold imports still affects the current account balance  
negatively . While t he current account balance posted a deficit of USD 3 .1 billion in August  
2022, the annualized current account deficit increased by USD 4.2  billion to USD 40.9  billion. 
The provisional foreign trade data for September and  the high frequency data for October 
suggest that the deceleration in exports continues.  Having posted a limited decelerat ion 
excluding energy and gold, imports, on the other hand, have maintain ed their strength due 
to the high level of  energy and gold imports . Despite the increase in the foreign trade deficit 
led by the surge in commodity prices, mainly energy prices, the ongoing uptrend in services 
revenues continue to support the current account balance.  While share of sustainable 
components of economic growth increases, thanks to the increase in per capita tourist 4 
 spending, the stronger than expected contribution of tourism revenues to the current 
account balance continues. On the other hand, high course of energy prices and the 
likelihood of a recession in main trade partners keep the risks on current account balance 
alive. Sustainable c urrent account balance is important for price stability.  
Monetary Policy  
17. The monetary policy stance will be determined by taking into account the evaluations on the 
source and permanence of risks, along with the extent to which they can be contained by 
monetary policy, and with a focus on achieving the sustainable price stability target, in a 
cautious manner.  
18. In formulating the monetary policy towards achieving the sustainable price stability objective, a liraization -oriented approach will be maintained th at also addresses risks to financial 
stability.  The rate of credit growth and allocation of funds for real economic activity purposes 
are closely monitored. In addition, the spread between policy rate and the loan interest rates 
driven by the announced mac roprudential measures is closely monitored. The Committee 
will continue to further strengthen the tools supporting the effectiveness of the monetary 
transmission mechanism.  
19. The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken a nd 
decisively implemented for strengthening sustainable price and financial stability along with 
the resolution of the ongoing regional conflict. The effects of slowing foreign demand on 
aggregate demand conditions and production are closely monitored. It is critically important 
that financial conditions remain supportive to preserve the growth momentum in industrial 
production and the positive trend in employment in a period of increasing uncertainties 
regarding global growth as well as further escalation of geopolitical risks. Accordingly, the 
Committee has decided to reduce the policy rate by 150 basis points. The Committee 
evaluated taking a similar step in the following meeting and ending the rate cut cycle.  
20. To create an institutional basis for sustain able price stability, the comprehensive review of 
the policy framework continues with the aim of encouraging permanent and strengthened 
liraization in all policy tools of the CBRT. The focus of this process will be on developing policy 
instruments to suppo rt the improvement of Turkish lira deposits, to increase Turkish lira -
denominated assets in the collateral structure of OMO funding, to gradually reduce the volume of swaps, and to strengthen foreign exchange reserves.  
21. The credit, collateral and liquidity policy actions, of which the review process is finalized, will continue to be implemented to strengthen the effectiveness of the monetary policy 
transmission mechanism. The rise in the demand for long -term fixed -income and Turkish lira -
denominated assets a nd the course of the yield in tandem with the direction of the efficiency 
of monetary transmission is closely monitored. Along with credit growth, the Committee will 
also consider the improvement in financing costs of loans providing efficiency gains in 
targeted areas so as to maintain the transmission.  
22. Accordingly, the effects of liquidity and distribution developments of the Turkish lira on deposits and loan pricing, the effects of exchange rate developments on inflation, and the 
impact of the development s regarding FX -protected deposit products on reverse currency 
substitution, the depth and stability of the foreign exchange market, and price stability are being analyzed, and necessary policy measures are being taken.  
23. The CBRT will continue to use all ava ilable instruments decisively within the framework of the 
liraization strategy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the 
medium- term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price 
stability.  5 
 24. Stability  in the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability 
through the fall in country risk premium, continuation of the reversal in currency substitution 
and the upward trend in foreign exchange reserves, and durable decline i n financing costs. 
This would create a viable foundation for investment, production and employment to continue growing in a healthy and sustainable way.  
25. The Committee supports building strong policy coordination and a holistic macro policy mix 
involving all stakeholders in order to achieve price stability.  
26. The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data -
driven framework.  
 