1 
  
 
Summary of the Monetary Policy  
Committee Meeting  
 
29 September 2022, No: 2022 -40  
  Meeting Date: 22 September 2022  
Inflation Developments  
1. Consumer prices rose by 1.46% in August, and annual inflation edged up by 0.61 points to 
80.21%. In this period, annual inflation receded in energy and food, whereas it went up in 
core goods and services. Annual inflation increased in subgroups of core goods; in services, 
while dropped in transpo rt, it rose in other subgroups of services. In the food group, driven 
by prices of fresh fruits and vegetables, annual inflation fell in unprocessed food, but 
increased further in processed food. Energy inflation registered a decline on the back of fuel 
prices that fell in tandem with the outlook for international crude oil prices. In line with the 
fall in international commodity prices, the monthly increase in producer prices lost pace 
compared to past months, and annual inflation decreased somewhat. Again st this 
background, the rise in the annual inflation of B and C indices continued, while some core 
indicators such as seasonally -adjusted median inflation posted a limited decline.  
2. Prices of food and non -alcoholic beverages increased by 0.85% in August, wh ile the group’s 
annual inflation dropped by 4.40 points to 90.25%. While annual inflation fell by 11.49 points 
to 79.51% in unprocessed food, it increased by 2.36 points to 100.38% in processed food. 
Seasonally -adjusted prices of fresh fruits and vegetable s recorded a decline in August. In 
other unprocessed food, price hikes in eggs and rice were notable, while white meat and 
potatoes registered falling prices. Meanwhile, the rise in processed food prices was driven by 
bread -cereals accompanied by sugar and  related products as well as canned vegetables and 
non-alcoholic beverages.  
3. Energy prices receded by 2.68% in August, and the group’s annual inflation fell by 7.54 points 
to 121.73%. The decline of 7.79% in fuel prices following the fall in international c rude oil 
prices was the main driver of energy prices also in August. On the other hand, municipal 
water and solid fuel prices continued to increase.  
4. Prices of services rose by 3.16% in August, pushing annual services inflation up by 2.85 points 
to 54.30%.  In this period, while  annual inflation receded slightly in the transport group due to 
the developments in fuel prices, it increased in other subgroups, most visibly in other 
services and rents. Price increases were broad -based in the other services subgro up. 
Education, due to the raised university tuitions, health, recreation -culture and insurance 
services driven by car insurance items stood out. The monthly increase in the rents group 
remained high at 4.40%, and seasonally -adjusted data suggested an accel eration compared 
to previous months. In the restaurants -hotels group, price increase was higher compared to 
the previous month, yet remained below those in the first half of the year. In August, annual 
inflation in this subgroup edged up by 1.81 points and  reached 80.95%. In transport services, 
2 
 increases in urban passenger transport, air passenger transport and cargo fees were notable, 
while the decline in intercity passenger transport by road kept subgroup’s price increase 
moderate, and annual inflation ed ged down by 0.42 points to 90.29%.  
5. Annual core goods inflation rose by 5.98% points to 76.91% in August. Price hikes in durable 
goods were driven by automobiles and white goods, and annual inflation in this group rose 
by 6.86 points and hit 91.79%. Paralle l to July, prices of clothing and footwear registered 
increases contrary to seasonal norms, and annual inflation rose by 5.93 points to 37.38% in 
this subgroup. In other core goods, annual inflation increased by 4.41% to 80.12%, with 
household cleaning sup plies, medicines and personal care products in the lead.  
6. According to the September results of the Survey of Market Participants, current year -end 
inflation expectations decreased by 2.87 points to 67.73%, while 12 -month ahead inflation 
expectations were revised downwards by 5.25 points to 36.74%. Meanwhile, 24 -month ahead 
inflation expectations dropped by 3.72 points to 20.63%.  
Factors Affecting Inflation and Risks  
7. The weakening effects of geopolitical risks on global economic activity continue to increase. 
Global growth forecasts for the upcoming period are being revised downwards and recession 
is increasingly assessed as an inevitable risk factor.  
8. While the negative consequences of supply constraints in some sectors, particularly basic 
food, have been alleviated by the strategic solutions facilitated by Türkiye, the upward trend 
in producer and consumer prices continues on an international scale. The effects of high 
global inflation on inflation expectations and international financial markets are closely 
monitored. Moreover, central banks in advanced economies emphasize that the rise in 
inflation may last longer than previously anticipated due to rising energy prices, imbalances 
between supply and demand, and rigidities in labor markets. The diverg ence in monetary 
policy steps and communications of central banks in advanced economies continue due to 
their diverse economic outlook. It is observed that central banks continue their efforts to 
develop new supportive measures and tools to cope with the i ncreasing uncertainties in 
financial markets.  
9. Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets have both 
continued to register outflows in September in line with the global risk appetite. Moreover, 
the volatility in the long -term bo nd yields in advanced economies and the course of global 
financial conditions keep the risks to portfolio flows to emerging economies alive.  
10. Due to the impact of the policy steps taken within the scope of the liraization strategy, 
Türkiye's Turkish lira -denominated government bond yields, especially in long maturities, 
performed more favorably in this period compared to peer economies.  
11. Increase in inflation is driven by the lagged and indirect effects of rising energy costs resulting 
from geopolitical deve lopments, effects of pricing formations that are not supported by 
economic fundamentals, strong negative supply shocks caused by the rise in global energy, 
food and agricultural commodity prices.  
12. Annual producer inflation decreased in August. It is evaluated that the moderate course of 
international commodity prices and the declines in transport expenses have alleviated cost 
pressures to some extent. Having surged due to geopolitical problems, natu ral gas prices 
continued to be the main factor deteriorating this outlook in August. Across main industrial 
groupings, annual inflation declined in the energy group led by petroleum products, but 
increased in other subgroups in August. While price increase s became widespread across 
subgroups, tobacco products, other mining and quarrying products, basic pharmaceuticals 
and paper and paper products stood out. Meanwhile, the effect of the positive outlook for 3 
 international commodity prices was more pronounced in refined petroleum products and 
base metals, and prices fell further in these subgroups.  
13. A strong growth was observed in the first half of 2022. The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 
data  for the second quarter of 2022 indicated that economic activity maintai ned its strong 
course in the  first quarter. In this period, GDP increased by 7.6% year -on-year, and by 2.1% 
quarter -on-quarter in seasonal and calendar -adjusted terms . Industrial value added 
increased by 7.8% on an annual basis thanks to the strong  course of exports.  The value 
added of the services sectors increased by 11.9% on the back of the strong tourism activity 
despite the war. The contribution of net exports t o annual growth was 2.7 points. Machinery -
equipment investments, one of the subitems of inve stments , went up  by 17.8% on an annual 
basis, showing an annual increase for  eleven  quarters in a row.  
14. Since the beginning of July, leading indicators have been pointing to a slowdown in growth 
due to the weakening foreign demand.  While industrial production decreased by 6.2% 
month -on-month  in seasonally and calendar adjusted terms , it increased by 3.1% year -on-
year in  July. After increasing by 1.9% and 0.9% in the first two quarters of the year, industrial 
production contracted by 5.1% in the third  quarter due to the bridge days associated with the 
religious holidays and partial suspension of production in  factories in July. While, t he month -
on-month decline in industrial production spread across sectors  in July , clothing, textiles, 
basic metals and  other transportation sectors post ed higher monthly production losses of 
8.6%, 10%, 9.3% and 19.4%, respectively. Although the retail sales volume index decreased 
slightly in July compared to the previous month, credit card spending continued to increase i n 
the July -August period compared to the previous quarter.  
15. Leading indicators for the third quarter continue pointing to loss of momentum in economic 
activity due to the decreasing foreign demand.  Survey -based indicators such as Business 
Tendency Survey, PMI and sectoral confidence indices as well as other high -frequency data 
point to a quarterly slowdown in economic activity as of mid -September. Registered domestic 
and external orders and future o rder expectations of manufacturing industry firms reveals a 
weakening in total demand, which is more pronounced for external demand. Firms' 
investment and employment expectations declined compared to the second quarter.  
Information obtained from field inte rviews also gave similar signals regarding the economic 
activity in this period.  
16. In July, employment was about 3 million higher than its pre -pandemic level (February 2020). 
In fact, compared to peer economies, job creation has been stronger. Considering th e sectors 
that contribute to the employment increase, it is observed that the growth dynamics are 
supported by structural gains.  On the other hand, on a monthly basis  compared to the 
previous month , seasonally adjusted employment decreased by 148,000 perso ns leading 
0.5% decrease in July . In this period, seasonally adjusted labor force participation rate 
decreased from 53.1% in the previous month by 0.5 points to 52.6% and is still 1.7 
percentage points above its pre -pandemic level (February 2020). In July,  on the 
unemployment rate, the downward effect of the decline in labor force participation exceeded 
the upward effect of the decline in employment. Thus, the unemployment rate declined and 
dropped by 0.3 points from the previous month to 10.1%.  Survey indi cators and high -
frequency data indicate that the upward trend in employment  has lost momentum.  
17. The recent strong course of energy and gold imports still affects the current account balance.  
The current account balance posted a deficit of USD 4.0 billion in  July 2022, while the 
annualized current account deficit increased by USD 3.7 billion to USD 36.6 billion.  When the 
provisional foreign trade data for August is evaluated together with the high frequency data 
for September, it is observed that uptrend in the first half of the year in seasonally adjusted 
exports is replaced by a limited dec line in the third quarter. Imports, on the other hand, 4 
 strengthened on the back of high imports of energy and gold.  Despite the increase in the 
foreign trade deficit led by the surge in commodity prices, mainly energy prices, the ongoing 
uptrend in services revenues continue to support the current account balance.  While share 
of sustainable components of economic growth increases, the stronger than expected 
contribution of  tourism revenues to the current account balance continues thanks to the 
increase in per capita tourist spending.  On the other hand, high course of energy prices and 
the likelihood of a recession in main trade partners keep the risks on current account bal ance 
alive. Sustainable current account balance is important for price stability.   
Monetary Policy  
18. The monetary policy stance will be determined by taking into account the evaluations on the 
source and permanence of risks, along with the extent to which th ey can be contained by 
monetary policy, and with a focus on achieving the sustainable price stability target, in a 
cautious manner.  
19. In formulating the monetary policy towards achieving the sustainable price stability objective, 
a liraization -oriented appro ach will be maintained that also addresses risks to financial 
stability. The rate of credit growth and allocation of funds for real economic activity purposes 
are closely monitored. In addition, the spread between policy rate and the loan interest rates 
driven by the announced macroprudential measures is closely monitored. The Committee 
will continue to further strengthen the tools supporting the effectiveness of the monetary 
transmission mechanism.  
20. The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the  back of measures taken and 
decisively implemented for strengthening sustainable price and financial stability along with 
the resolution of the ongoing regional conflict. It is important that financial conditions remain 
supportive to preserve the growth mo mentum in industrial production and the positive trend 
in employment in a period of increasing uncertainties regarding global growth as well as 
escalating geopolitical risks. Accordingly, the Committee has decided to reduce the policy rate 
by 100 basis poi nts, and has assessed that the updated level of policy rate is adequate under 
the current outlook.  
21. To create an institutional basis for sustainable price stability, the comprehensive review of 
the policy framework continues with the aim of encouraging perm anent and strengthened 
liraization in all policy tools of the CBRT. The focus of this process will be on developing policy 
instruments to support the improvement of Turkish lira deposits, to increase Turkish lira -
denominated assets in the collateral struct ure of OMO funding, to gradually reduce the 
volume of swaps, and to strengthen foreign exchange reserves.  
22. The credit, collateral and liquidity policy actions, of which the review process is finalized, will 
continue to be implemented to strengthen the effec tiveness of the monetary policy 
transmission mechanism. The rise in the demand for long -term fixed -income and Turkish lira -
denominated assets and the course of the yield in tandem with the direction of the efficiency 
of monetary transmission is closely mon itored. Along with credit growth, the Committee will 
also consider the improvement in financing costs of loans providing efficiency gains in 
targeted areas so as to maintain the transmission.  
23. Accordingly, the effects of liquidity and distribution developme nts of the Turkish lira on 
deposits and loan pricing, the effects of exchange rate developments on inflation, and the 
impact of the developments regarding FX -protected deposit products on reverse currency 
substitution, the depth and stability of the foreig n exchange market, and price stability are 
being analyzed, and necessary policy measures are being taken.  5 
 24. The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively within the framework of the 
liraization strategy until strong indicators point to a  permanent fall in inflation and the 
medium -term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price 
stability.  
25. Stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability 
through the fall in count ry risk premium, continuation of the reversal in currency substitution 
and the upward trend in foreign exchange reserves, and durable decline in financing costs. 
This would create a viable foundation for investment, production and employment to 
continue gr owing in a healthy and sustainable way.  
26. The Committee supports building strong policy coordination and a holistic macro policy mix 
involving all stakeholders in order to achieve price stability.  
27. The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transp arent, predictable and data -
driven framework.  
 