  
 
 
 
HEAD OFFICE                                                                                        ANKARA , 31 January  2022 
Please refer to : 
TCMB: 98422658 -  
 
 
 TÜRKİYE CUMHURİYET MERKEZ BANKASI A.Ş.  Hacı Bayram  Mah. İstiklal Cad. No:10 06050 Ulus Altındağ /  ANKARA  
 TİCARET SİCİL NUMARASI: 269  Tel: +90 (312) 507 50 00 Faks: + 90 (312) 507 56 40  
 SERMAYESİ: 25.000 TL  E-Posta: iletisimbilgi@tcmb.gov.tr  Swift: tcmbtr2a  
 İDARE MERKEZİ, ANKARA  Genel  Ağ: http://www.tcmb.gov.tr  
  Kayıtlı Elektronik Posta (KEP): merkezbankasi@hs02.kep.tr  
 
 
 
Dr. Nureddin NEBATİ  
MINISTER OF TREASURY AND FINANCE  
ANKARA  
 
Pursuant to Article 42 of the Central Bank Law No. 1211, when the inflation target cannot be 
achieved, the Central Bank of  the Republic of T ürkiye  (CBRT) is accountable for reporting to the 
Government and announcing to the public the reasons for the deviation from the  
inflation target and the necessary measures to be taken. Consumer inflation at the end of 2021 
remained above  the uncertainty band set around the 5% target. Accordingly, attached we hereby 
submit to you the January 2022 Inflation Report, which explains the reasons for the significant 
deviation of inflation from the targeted path, along with the measures already t aken and to be taken 
to achieve the targets, for your kind information.  
Instead of focusing on short -lived immediate gains, the CBRT has initiated a comprehensive 
monetary policy review process to achieve sustainable  and permanent price stability in the lo ng run. 
The liraization strategy is the most crucial part of this process . This liraization will support the 
monetary policy instruments in the medium and long -term fight against inflation through three 
channels.  
Firstly, Turkish lira savings will be encouraged through FX -protected accounts and similar 
tools, and the returns on such accounts will not be allowed to remain lower than their alternatives. It 
is already obvious that FX -protected savings tools will help with the structural transformation  of 
maturit y extensions , addressing the long -standing issue of very short maturities . We expect that the 
liraization process will provide a lasting contribution to price stability in the medium term thanks to 
our decisions regard ing reserve requirements and FX -protected deposits.   
 
 
 
 TÜRKİYE CUMHURİYET MERKEZ BANKASI A.Ş.  Hacı Bayram Mah. İstiklal Cad. No:10 06050 Ulus Altındağ / ANKARA  
 TİCARET SİCİL NUMARASI: 269  Tel: +90 (312) 507 50 00 Faks: + 90 (312) 507 56 40  
 SERMAYESİ: 25.000 TL  E-Posta: iletisimbilgi@tcmb.gov.tr  Swift: tcmbtr2a  
 İDARE MERKEZİ, ANKARA  Genel Ağ: http://www.tcmb.gov.tr  
  Kayıtlı Elektronik Posta (KEP): merkezbankasi@hs02.kep.tr  
Secondly, the transition to Turkish lira instruments for CBRT liquidity and provisioning 
operations will be carried out progressively . Specifically, the funding share of currency swap 
transactions in tota l funding will be reduced. In accessing Turkish lira, p riority will be given to 
Turkish lira -denominated collaterals and  instruments . We will also incorporate this principle into 
reserve requirement policies.  
Thirdly, to secure permanent gains in disinflat ion by improving production capacity, it is 
important to meet funding needs of sectors that support the current account balance and engage in 
foreign exchange earning activities at suitable maturities in Turkish lira terms . Dependence on 
external loans to finance production will be minimized with the help of loans aligned with the above 
targets . Thus , necessary conditions for ensuring the long -term stability of  exchange rates  that are 
determined by  free market  conditions and economic fundamentals  will be es tablished .  
Coordinated economic policies and the widest possible  public consensus are  essential to  the 
success of the steps taken to achieve  and maintain  price stability. In this context, the potential for 
success in achieving sustainable price stability is greater than ever. The discipline d fiscal  stance is 
expected to have a high contribution to the fight against inflation. For permanent price stability,  full 
align ment of  taxation strategies with price stability targets  as well as the  effective use of the public  
inspection, supervision and regulat ion capacit y against the factors hindering price competition in 
trade  will remain significant .  
 Sincerely,  
  
 
 
 
     CENTRAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC OF T ÜRKİYE  
        Head Office  
 
 
 
      Prof. Şahap Kavcıoğlu            Taha Çakmak  
       Governor                            Deputy Governor  
 
 
 
Annex: 2022 January Inflation Report   