Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of T ürkiye ) 
Head Office  
Hacı Bayram Mahallesi  
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06050 Ulus Altındağ / Ankara  
+90 (312) 507 50 00  
www.tcmb.gov.tr    
Press Release on the Use of FAST 
System as a Payment Method in 
Purchase and Sale Transactions  
14 February  2022  No: 2022 -13 
 
Efforts are made  to enable the use of the Instant and Continuous Transfer of Funds (FAST) 
System in purchase and sale  transactions as a complementary  payment method to cash 
payment s. In business payments to be made using the “TR QR Code” integrated in the FAST 
System , up to  TRY 10,000 can be pa id at on e tim e.   
 
The Central Bank of the Republic of T ürkiye  (CBRT) established T ürkiye ’s QR code standards, 
called  “TR QR Code”, on 21 August 2020  as part of intentional efforts to support innovative 
methods of executing and handl ing payments , and launched the FAST as a new generation 
instant payment system on 8 January  2021 . The CBRT closely monitors any developments in 
strategic technologies for a s wift adaptation of all kinds of technological innovations  focu sing on 
liraization in the payments ecosystem . Another initiative  in pro gress  in this respect is the “Digital 
Turkish Lira Collaboration Platform” announced on 15 September 2021 by the CBRT as part of 
its medium and long -term objective to make  payments in lira the most practical, most effortless , 
cheapest and most inclusive payment instrument .  
The CBRT and the Interbank Card Center carry out efforts  to ensure that the FAST S ystem can be  
used as an alternative payment method  complementing the cash payment method in 
purchase and sale  transactions . In business payments to be made using the “TR QR Code”, up 
to TRY 10,000 can be paid at one time . With TR QR Code starting to be used widely in our daily 
lives, people  will be able to make instant payments for their purchases via the FAST System 
infrastructure by scanning the payment QR code of the business with their mobile applications .  
Through the FAST System, which allows 24/7 instant transfer of funds , an average of 3.5 
million payments are processed per day and transfers are completed in less than a second 
between customer accounts. Instead of IBAN s, which are difficult to memorize and use, the Easy 
Addressing System allows users to initiate payments easily and rapidly using phone numbers, 
Turkish ID numbers or email addresses, and the number of users registered in this system has 
reached 15.5 million. Considering the great interest in the FAST Sy stem as well as the dynamic 
requirements of the payments ecosystem, the FAST transaction amount limit for money 
transfers, which is currently TRY 2,000 , will be raised to TRY 5,000 as of 21 February 2022 . 
These developments are considered to provide major contributions to the Turkish economy in 
line with our digitalization target.  
Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of T ürkiye ) 
Head Office  
Hacı Bayram Mahallesi  
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06050 Ulus Altındağ / Ankara  
+90 (312) 507 50 00  
www.tcmb.gov.tr   More details and fact sheets about the FAST S ystem are available at  https://fast.tcmb.gov.tr  (in 
Turkish).  
 
 
Contact  
For further information, please send an e -mail to basin@tcmb.gov.tr.  
 
 