1  
Highlights from Deputy Governor   
Taha Çakmak’s Interview  with the 
Reuters News Agency  
 12 October 2022  
 
 
The Turkish banking sector extended corporate loans of TRY 1.21 trillion to firms in the January -
September 2022 period.  The amount of corporate loans extended by the banking sector to firms 
in September alone was TRY 163 billion, which is more than the total of loans extended in the 
first nine months of 2021 and five times the t otal of loans extended in September 2021.  The goal 
of the macroprudential measures implemented was to ensure the targeted use of loans. The most significant result of this policy  was that  SMEs were extended loans of net TRY 558 billion in 
the January -Sept ember period, which is 10 times higher than loans of TRY 54 billion extended in 
the same period in 2021. The net borrowing of SMEs in September alone was more than three 
times their borrowing in July -September 2021, and 1.5 times their borrowing in January - 
September 2021. This is the highest amount and share that SMEs received from ba nking sector 
loans ever recorded.  
The monetary policy and macroprudential measures in effect since the last quarter of 2021 have 
increased the share of TRY in the credit composition and prepared the ground for long -term TRY 
financing in the financial system.  
An additional aim is to help borrower s with limited access to lending , such as SME loans, 
tradesmen loans and agricultural loans, have access to long -term and low -cost fin ancing in order 
to keep them in business in a sustainable way.  
Supporting exporting sectors, which are one of the essential components of strong and 
sustainable economic activity, and investment loans, which are critical to boosting the growth 
potential of the economy, is another key feature of this policy mix. Thus, the new policy 
framework in place since the last quarter of 2021 when the rate cut cycle was initiated has been strengthened with macroprudential policies starting from the second quarter of 20 22. 
With macroprudential policies, we have adopted  the selective credit approach that increases 
investment, employment, value- added production and exports. Accordingly , Turkish lira -
denominated rediscount credits are extend ed to exporters with an interest rate up to 9% and 
with a maturity up to 1 year. R ediscount  credits were provided through the Eximbank channel 
totalling USD 20 billion as well as other banks amounting to USD 10 billion.   
In addition, export commitment s in rediscount credits  were removed, which  enabled companies 
to utilize  export credits other than rediscount credits from banks with these commitments.  
Long -term (with 2 -year grace period, 10 -year maturity and 9% interest rate) A dvance Loans 
against  Investment Commit ment amounting to TRY 60 billion have been extended to 
approximately 350 companies that have made investment decisions for  exports as well as import 
substitution  so far.  
 
2 With the securities maintenance facility, banks are free to extend l oans to companies selectively. 
Thanks to the Treasury papers bought by the banking sector after the regulations, the yield curve 
became skewed to the downside, particularly in long maturities, and we think it is important that 
this shift is lasting . 
TRY co mmercial loan rates, which were around 23% on average in 2021, receded to 18%. We 
observe that the commercial loan rate is in a range compatible with the policy rate.  
Thanks not only to macroprudential measures but also to the contributions of all stakehol ders to 
the new economic model,  the current policy mix does not exert inflationary pressure and 
resources are directed to areas needed by sustainable economic activity.  
 
 