1 
  
Press Release on Interest Rates  
17 February 2022 No: 2022-14 
 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Şahap Kavcıoğlu (Governor), Taha Çakmak, Mustafa Duman, Elif Haykır Hobikoğlu, Emrah Şener, 
Yusuf Tuna.  
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to keep the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) constant at 14 percent.  
The variants  and increasing geopolitical risks keep the downside risks to global economic activity 
alive  and increases  the uncertainty . Recovery in global demand, high course of commodity prices, 
supply constraints in some sectors , particulary in energy,  and high  transportation costs have led 
to producer and consumer price increases internationally. The effects o f high global inflation  on 
inflation expectations and international financial markets are closely monitored . Moreover, 
central banks in advanced economies assess that the rise in inflation may last longer than 
previously anticipated  due to  rising energy pr ices and imbalances between supply and demand . 
Accordingly, while monetary policy communication of central banks in advanced economies 
varies with their diverse outlook for economic activity, labor market and inflation expectations , 
they  still continue their supportive monetary stances and asset purchase programs.  
Level of capacity uti lization and other l eading indicators show that domestic economic activity 
remains strong, with the help of robust external demand . While s hare  of sustainable 
components of  economic growth increase s, current account balance is expected to post a 
surplus in 2022.  Strengthening of the improv ing trend in current account balance  is important for 
price stability. The Committee assesses  that extending long -term  Turkish lira  investment credit  
will play a significant role  in achieving this target.  
Increase in inflation in the recent  period  has been driven by  pricing formation s that are not 
supported by economic fundamentals,  supply side factors such as the rise in global energ y, food 
and agricultural commodity prices,  supply constraints, and demand developments. The 
Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of  measures taken and decisively 
pursued for sustainable price and financial stability  along with the decline in inf lation owing to 
the base effect . Accordingly, the  Committee has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged.  
While c umulative impact of the recent policy decisions is being monitored , to create a foundation 
for sustainable price stability, the comprehensive review of the poli cy framework is being 
conducted with the aim of encouraging permanent  liraization  in all policy tools of the CBRT.  
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively within the framework of 
liraization strate gy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium -
term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability. Stability in 
the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financia l stability through the fall 
in country risk premium, continuation of the reversal in currency substitution and the upward 
trend in foreign exchange reserves, and durable decline in financing costs. This would create a 
viable foundation for investment, pro duction and employment to continue growing in a healthy 
and sustainable way.  
2 
 The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data -driven 
framework.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released wi thin five working 
days.  