Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
Hacı Bayram Mahallesi  
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06050 Ulus Altındağ / Ankara  
+90 (312) 507 50 00 
www.tcmb.gov.tr   
  
Open Banking Press Release  
1 December  2022 No: 2022-48 
 
The Central Bank of the Republic of Türkiye (CBRT) launches the Open Banking services in 
the payments area, which is considered an essential component of the digital economy 
roadmap of the Liraization Strategy.  
As of today, participating banks start provi ding services through the 'Open Banking 
Gateway' (GEÇİT) infrastructure, developed by the Interbank Card Center (ICC), that allows 
third parties to provide Open Banking transactions.  
 
Payment Initiation Service (subparagraph f) and the Service of Presenting Consolidated 
Information regarding the payment account on online platforms (subparagraph g) were added to 
the first paragraph of article 12 of the "Law No. 6493 on Payment and Securities Settlement 
Systems, Payment Services and Electronic Money I nstitutions" updated on 12 November 2019, 
defining those services as payment services within the scope of the Law. Thus , these two 
services, called Data Sharing in the F ield of Payment Services  (DSSP) , are defined as O pen 
Banking Services in the field of p ayment  services  provision . 
Consistent  with the regulatory frame work, investigations  have been  carried out with the 
cooperation and collaboration of the CBRT and ICC in order to determine the DSSP  
implementation strategy and the detailed technical and operational requirements. The best 
global practice s have been examined  while considering the particular conditions and special 
needs of Türkiye. A  shared platform has been  designed for rapid integration of all stakeholders, 
which provides a low -cost, efficient and effective d ata sharing in the field of Payment Services. In 
this direction, GEÇİT  (as an Application Programming Interface, API), has been developed and 
introduced by ICC using in-house capabilities  and technical resources and fac ilities . GEÇİT  allows 
the provision of safe, efficient, effective, low- cost and innovative business models for Open 
Banking in payment services domain.  
As of today, six banks, as account servicing payment service providers, have successfully 
completed thei r tests and technical certifications and started to provide services through GEÇİT. 
Meanwhile , as a result of the work carried out by the DSSP Working Group, the DSSP API 
Principles and Rules (API Standard) document, in which the technical and operational 
requirements for DSSP has been prepared and publicly published on our Bank's website.  
Besides Instant and Continuous Transfer of Funds (FAST) System , which allows 24/7/365 
interbank instant fund transfer  services; TR QR Code, which is the national QR Code S tandard  of 
Türkiye  in the field of payments  ecosystem ; Easy Addressing System , which allows FAST 
payments to be made easily and quickly with a phone number, ID number or e -mail address 
Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
(Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey)  
Head Office  
Hacı Bayram Mahallesi  
İstiklal Caddesi 10 06050 Ulus Altındağ / Ankara  
+90 (312) 507 50 00 
www.tcmb.gov.tr   
 instead of IBAN, the Data Sharing Services in the Field of Payment Services  with the " Digital  
Turkish Lira Collaboration Platform " announced by the CBRT on September 15, 2021, whose 
medium and long -term aim is to ensure and maintain that lira payments as  the most practical, 
pragmatic, cheapest and most inclusive means of payment, are in line with our digitalization 
goals and will make very important progressive contributions to Türkiye 's goal of reaching to a 
full-fledged digital economy.  
 
 
Contact  
For further information, you may send an e -mail to basin@tcmb.gov.tr.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 