1 
  
Press Release on Interest Rates  
21 July 2022 No: 2022-32 
 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Şahap Kavcıoğlu (Governor), Taha Çakmak, Mustafa Duman, Elif Haykır Hobikoğlu, Emrah Şener,  
Yusuf Tuna.  
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to keep the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) constant at 14 percent.  
The escalat ing geopolitical risks has continued to be  adversely realized and caused further  
weakening in the worldwide  economic activity. Global g rowth forecasts for the upcoming period 
are be ing revised downwards  and the likelihood of a recession has increased . Increasing c oncern 
over global food security  driven by trade restrictions , high  and volatile  course of commodity 
prices,  and the persistence of supply constraints in some sectors , particularly  in food , have led to 
producer and consumer price increases internationally. The effects of high global inflation  on 
inflation expectations and internationa l financial markets are closely monitored. Moreover, 
central banks in advanced economies emphasize  that the rise in inflation may last longer than 
previously anticipated due to rising energy prices , imbalances between supply and demand , and 
rigidities in l abor market s. The divergence in monetary policy steps and communications of 
central banks in advanced economies continue  due to their diverse economic outlook. It is 
observed that central banks have increased  and diversified  their efforts to develop new 
supportive  measures  and tools to cope with the increasing uncertainties in financial markets .  
Robust growth in the beginning of the year  continue d in the second quarter  as well , with the 
support  of external  demand . Compared to peer  economies , job creation has been stronger . 
While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, the tourism -led 
improvement in current account balance continues with a solid pace.  On the other hand, high 
course of energy prices and the likelihood of a  recession in main trade partners keep the risks on 
current account balance  alive.  Sustainable current account balance is important for price 
stability. Despite l osing momentum, c redit growth , and allocation  of funds for real economic 
activity purposes are closely monitored. The Committee will continue to implement the  
strengthened macroprudential policy set decisively and take additional measures when needed.   
Increase in inflation is driven  by rising energy costs resulting from geopolitical developments, 
effects of pricing formations that are not supported by economic fundamentals, strong negative 
supply shocks caused by the rise in global energy, food and agricultural commodity prices. The 
Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of measures  taken and decisively 
implemented  for strengthening  sustainable price and financial stability along with the resolution 
of the ongoing regional conflict . Accordingly, the Committee has decided to keep the policy rate 
unchanged. To create an institutional basis for sustainable price stability, the comprehensive 
review of the policy framework continues with the aim of encouraging permanent and 
strengthened liraization in all policy tools o f the CBRT . The credit, collateral and liquidity policy 
actions, of which the review process is finalized, will continue to be implemented  to strengthen 
the effectiveness of the monetary policy transmission mechanism.  
2 
 The CBRT will continue to use all avai lable instruments decisively within the framework of 
liraization strategy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium -
term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability. Stability in 
the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability through the fall 
in country risk premium, continuation of the reversal in currency substitution and the upward 
trend in foreign exchange reserves, and durable decline in fin ancing costs. This would create a 
viable foundation for investment, production and employment to continue growing in a healthy 
and sustainable way.  
The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data -driven 
framework.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working 
days.  