Press Release on Interest Rates
26 May 2022

No: 2022-26

Participating Committee Members
Şahap Kavcıoğlu (Governor), Taha Çakmak, Mustafa Duman, Elif Haykır Hobikoğlu, Emrah Şener,
Yusuf Tuna.
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to keep the policy rate (one-week repo
auction rate) constant at 14 percent.
The escalation of ongoing geopolitical risks keeps the downside risks to regional and global
economic activity alive and increase the uncertainty. Increasing concern over global food security
driven by trade restrictions, high course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some sectors
that have become more evident particularly in energy and food, and high transportation costs
have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally. The effects of high global
inflation on inflation expectations and international financial markets are closely monitored.
Moreover, central banks in advanced economies emphasize that the rise in inflation may last
longer than previously anticipated due to rising energy prices and imbalances between supply
and demand. Accordingly, while monetary policy steps of central banks in advanced economies
vary with their diverse outlook for economic activity, labor market and inflation expectations,
they still continue their supportive monetary stances.
Level of capacity utilization and other leading indicators show that domestic economic activity
remains strong, with the help of more robust external demand even some regional differences
emerge. While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, risks on current
account balance due to energy prices continue. Sustainable current account balance is important
for price stability. The Committee also assesses that the credit growth including the long-term
investment loans and targeted usage of accessed funds for real economic activity is important for
financial stability. In this context, the Committee will decisively continue to implement the
strengthened macroprudential policy set by taking additional measures.
Increase in inflation is driven by rising energy costs resulting from geopolitical developments,
temporary effects of pricing formations that are not supported by economic fundamentals,
strong negative supply shocks caused by the rise in global energy, food and agricultural
commodity prices. The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of
strengthened measures for sustainable price and financial stability along with the decline in
inflation owing to the base effect and the resolution of the ongoing regional conflict. Accordingly,
the Committee has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged. To create an institutional basis for
sustainable price stability, the comprehensive review of the policy framework continues with the
aim of encouraging permanent and strengthened liraization in all policy tools of the CBRT. The
collateral and liquidity policy actions, of which the review process is finalized, will be
implemented.
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively within the framework of
liraization strategy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the mediumterm 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability. Stability in
the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability through the fall
1

in country risk premium, continuation of the reversal in currency substitution and the upward
trend in foreign exchange reserves, and durable decline in financing costs. This would create a
viable foundation for investment, production and employment to continue growing in a healthy
and sustainable way.
The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data-driven
framework.
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working
days.

2

