 
1 
  
Press Release on Interest Rates  
22 December  2022 No: 2022-51 
 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Şahap Kavcıoğlu (Governor), Taha Çakmak, Mustafa Duman, Elif Haykır Hobikoğlu, Emrah Şener.  
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to keep the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) constant at 9 percent.  
Leading indicators  point to continuation of recession concerns in developed economies as a 
result of ongoing geopolitical risks and interest rate hikes.  While  the negative consequences of 
supply constraints in some sectors, particularly basic food, have been alleviated by the strategic 
solution s facilitated  by Türkiye, the high level  in producer and consumer inflation continu es on 
an international scale . The effects of high global inflation  on inflation expectations and 
international financial markets are closely monitored. The divergence in monetary policy steps 
and communications of central banks in advanced economies continue to increase due to their 
diverse economic outlook. It is observed that central banks continue  their efforts to develop new 
supportive  measures  and tools to cope with the increasing uncertainties in financial markets. 
Additionally, f inancial market s started to adjust  their expectations that the central banks would 
end the rate hike cycles  in the near term  on the back of  the increasing recession risks.  
A strong growth was observed  in the first three quarters  of 2022 . Leading indicators for the last 
quarter  of the year continue point ing to a slowdown in growth due to the weakening foreign 
demand. However, the effects of foreign demand -based p ressures observed in  the 
manufacturing industry on domestic  demand  and supply capacity currently remain limited . 
Compared to peer  economies, job creation has been stronger . Considering the sectors that 
contribute to  the employment  increase , it is observed  that the growth dynamics are supported 
by structural gains. While share of sustainable components of economic g rowth increases, the 
stronger than expected contribution of tourism  revenues  to the current account balance 
continues. On the other hand, high level  of energy prices and the likelihood of a recession in 
main trade partners keep the risks on current account  balance  alive.  Sustainable current account 
balance is important for price stability. The rate of c redit growth  and allocation  of funds for real 
economic activity purposes are closely monitored. The Committee will continue to decisively  use 
the tools suppo rting  the effectiveness of the monetary transmission mechanism  and the entire 
policy toolset, particularly funding  channels , will be aligned with liraization targets.  The 
comprehensive set of policies to be implemented will be published in the 2023 Monetary and 
Exchange Rate document in December.   
Increase in inflation has been  driven by the lagged and indirect effects of rising energy costs 
resulting from geopolitical developments, effects of pricing formations that are not supported by 
economic fun damentals, strong n egative supply shocks caused by the rise in global energy, food 
and agricultural commodity prices. The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the 
back of measures  taken and decisively implemented  for strengthening  sustainable  price and 
financial stability along with the resolution of the ongoing regional conflict.  The e ffects of slowing  
foreign demand on aggregate demand conditions and production are closely monitored. It is 
critically important that financial condition s remai n supportive for the sustainability of structural 
 
2 
 gains in supply and investment capacity by preserv ing the growth momentum in industrial 
production and the positive trend in employment  in a period of increasing uncer tainties 
regarding global growth as wel l as further escalati on of  geopolitical risk s. Accordingly, the 
Committee  has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged.  Considering the increasing risks 
regarding global demand, t he Committee evaluated that the current policy rate  is adequate.  To 
create an institutional basis for sustainable price stability, the comprehensive review of the policy 
framework continues with the aim of encouraging permanent and strengthened liraization in all 
policy tools of the CBRT . The credit, collateral and liquid ity policy actions, of which the review 
process is finalized, will continue to be implemented  to strengthen the effectiveness of the 
monetary policy transmission mechanism.  
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively within the framework of  
liraization strategy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium -
term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability. Stability in 
the general price level will foster macro economic stability and financial stability through the fall 
in country risk premium, continuation of the reversal in currency substitution and the upward 
trend in foreign exchange reserves, and durable decline in financing costs. This would create a 
viable  foundation for investment, production and employment to continue growing in a healthy 
and sustainable way.  
The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data -driven 
framework.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Commit tee Meeting will be released within five working 
days.  