1 
  
Summary of the Monetary Policy 
Committee Meeting  
27 January  2022, No: 202 2-08  
Meeting Date : 20 January  2022  
Inflation Developments  
1. Consumer prices rose by 13.58% in December, and annual inflation increased by 14.77 points 
to 36.08 %. While this development was predominantly  driven by the price increases in the 
core goods and food groups, annual inflation went up across all main groups. The impact of  
exchange rate developments was ob served in the core goods group, in which the  exchange 
rate pass -through is high, led by  durable consumption goods , and prices in the food group 
excluding fresh fruits and vegetables rose substantially. The depreciation of the Turkish lira, 
the elevated cou rse of commodity prices, and the lingering disrupti ons in supply chains 
caused the rise in producer prices to continue at an accelerated pace. Against this 
background, the annual inflation and the recent underlying trends of the B and C indices 
increased s ignificantly.  
2. In December, prices of food and non -alcoholic beverages increased by 15.99%, and the 
group’s annual inflation surged by 16.69 points to 43.80%. Annual inflation rose to 39.83% in 
the unprocessed food group, and to 47.57% in the processed food  group. In the unprocessed 
food group, s easonally adjusted data revealed a relatively milder monthly increase in prices 
of fresh fruits and vegetables  whereas they pointed to significant price increases in the other 
unprocessed food group, particularly in items such as milk, white meat, eggs, potatoes, and 
red meat. Processed food prices posted a substantial monthly increase  of 16.47% in  
December , with bread and cereals, oils and fats, cheese and other dairy products, and meat 
products in the lead. These de velopments were mostly driven by exchange rates, agricultural 
commodity price developments, and agricultural drought.  
3. Energy prices increased by 9.75% in December, and annual energy inflation rose by 10.79 
points to 42.93%. Despite a decline in international energy prices in this period, domestic 
prices rose due to exchange rate developments . Solid fuels, bottled gas, and fuel stood out 
with the ongoing large price h ikes they registered . The rise in energy inflation is expected to 
continue in a  pronounced manner in January. This is due to the reboun ding international 
energy prices as well as the price adjustments made in January in electricity and natural gas 
used in dwellings.  
4. Annual core goods inflation increased substantially by 22.19 points to 40.55%. Led by the 
durable goods group in which the exchange rate pass -through is high, a nnual inflation rose 
significantly across all subcategories due to the developments in the Turkish lira . Durable 
goods prices surged by 30.33% month -on-month, driven by large price increases  in sub -items 
such as automobile s in particular , white goods, other  electric and non -electric appliances , 
and furniture . The clothing and footwear gro up, in which seasonal sales began, posted a 
monthly price increase in this period contrary to the seasonal trend. Meanwhile, price hikes 
showed a generalized pattern across other core goods as well.  
 
2 
 5. Services prices rose by 5.27% in December and annual ser vices inflation increased by 5.45 
points to 22.33%. While annual inflation declined in communication, it increased in other 
subcategories, most visibly in restaurants -hotels. Driven by p rices of catering services that 
increased due also to the negative out look in food prices, and by prices of accommodation 
services that further increased  in this period , annual inflation in the restaurants -hotels group 
reached  40.85%  and continued to push up the services inflation.  The rise in prices of 
transport services was led by increases in the intercity road transportation and air passenger  
transportation fares, while insurance charges  as well as maintenance and repair prices with 
high exchange rate sensitiv ity were the leading drivers of  the increase in prices of oth er 
services . According to seasonally adjusted data, the upward trend in rent inflation continued 
in December.  The strong backward -indexation mechanism in the services sector keeps the 
risks for the upcoming period alive.  
6. In December, prices of tobacco pro ducts posted an increase  of approximately TRY 2,  driven  
by producer firms, adding approximately 0.49 points to consumer inflation.  As of January, the 
last six months’ PPI increase in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco group was reflected in 
specific and m inimum specific taxes, and cigarette prices rose on average by TRY 4 per pack 
in line with the tax increase.    
7. According to the January results of the Survey of Market Participants , the current year -end 
inflation expectation stood at 29.75%, while the 12-month ahead inflation expectation 
increased by 3.98 points to 25.37%. The long -term data reveal that the revision in the five -
year ahead inflation expectation remained relatively limited, and the expectation increased 
by 0.20 points to 8.92%.  
Factors Af fecting Inflation and Risks  
8. Leading indicators show that the robust recovery in the global economy is sustained, albeit 
with some deceleration. Despite the recovery in global economic activity and the increase in 
the vaccination rate,  the new variants and increasing geopolitical risks keep the downside 
risks to global economic activity alive and increase the uncertainty.  
9. Recovery in global demand, high course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some 
sectors and rise in transportation costs have led t o producer and consumer price increases 
internationally. While the effects of high global inflation on inflation expectations and 
international financial markets are closely monitored, central banks in advanced economies 
assess that the rise in inflation o n the back of rising energy prices and imbalances between 
supply and demand may last longer than previously anticipated. Accordingly, while monetary 
policy communication of central banks in advanced economies varies with their diverse 
outlook for economic activity, labor market and inflation expectations, they continue their 
supportive monetary stances and asset purchase programs.  
10. Outflows from emerging market debt securities markets stopped, and equity markets 
witnessed a surge in inflows. The volatility i n long -term bond rates in advanced economies 
and the course of global financial conditions keep the risks to portfolio flows to emerging 
economies alive. The impact of such risks through portfolio flows channel towards Turkey are 
judged to prove to be rela tively limited, considering the current levels of non -residents’ 
portfolio positions.  
11. Increase in inflation in the recent period has been driven by distorted pricing behavior due to 
unhealthy price formations in the foreign exchange market, supply side fac tors such as the 
rise in global food and agricultural commodity prices, supply constraints, and demand 
developments.  3 
 12. Producer prices continued to rise markedly in December, largely due to energy and 
intermediate goods. Although prices were up across all se ctors, their tendency was 
particularly higher for manufacturing industry excluding oil and base metals. In this period, 
prices of main inputs such as base metals, energy, textile, paper and chemical products 
increased significantly. The depreciation of the  Turkish lira, higher commodity prices and 
ongoing supply chains disruptions were the main factors driving producer prices up. It is 
noteworthy that the indicators monitored for global supply chain pressures reached their 
highest level in history.  
13. Level of  capacity utilization and other leading indicators show that domestic economic activity 
remains strong, with the help of robust external demand. Adjusted for seasonal and calendar 
effects, the Industrial Production Index (IPI) increased by 3.3% month -on-month in 
November, indicating that production continued to grow at an even stronger pace in the 
fourth quarter of the year. While p roduction grew across all main industrial groups, the 
increases especially in  durable and capital goods were  stronger than  the headline  production 
growth . Industrial turnover indices suggest that both domestic and external demand are 
robust . As of December , investment tendencies of manufacturing industry firms for the next 
twelve months remain high.  
14. Despite the recent upsurge  in new cases, the spread of domestic vaccination throughout the 
society helps keep services, tourism and related sectors , which have been adversely affected 
by the pandemic, strong, and leads to a more balanced composition in economic activity.  In 
fact, a ccording to data on credit card spending, the rate of increase is higher for services 
sectors that are severely hit by the pandemic. The retail sales volume and services turnover 
indices continue to rise at a stronger pace.  
15. The improvement in the labor mar ket continues in line with the economic activity outlook.  In 
November, employment grew across all sectors, and the labor force participation rate 
increased. Thus, in seasonally adjusted terms, the unemployment rate remained unchanged 
at 11.2%.  Survey indic ators and high -frequency data suggest that the improvement in the 
employment outlook and the positive course in the labor market continue. However, the 
effects of the large minimum wage hike and the likely increase in other wages to the labor 
market, espec ially to registered employment, are closely monitored . 
16. Favorable external demand conditions impact the current account balance positively. Current 
account balance ran a deficit of USD 2.7 billion in November while the current account deficit  
decreased by U SD 0.9 billion to USD 14.3 billion in 12 -month cumulative terms. Provisional 
foreign trade data suggest that exports remained strong in December, but imports continued 
to increase  due to the large increase in energy imports. In addition to strong economic 
activity, the strong course of energy imports driven by high energy prices and the increased 
need for heating led to a deterioration in the foreign trade balance in the last quart er, 
whereas the real balancing in foreign trade excluding price effects continues. Despite this 
outlook in the foreign trade balance, the favorable course in services revenues continues to 
support the current account balance. While share of sustainable com ponents of economic 
growth increases, current account balance is expected to post a surplus in 2022. 
Strengthening of the improvement trend in current account balance is important for price 
stability objective, and in that respect, developments in commerci al and consumer loans are 
closely monitored.   
Monetary Policy  
17. The monetary policy stance will be set by taking into account the evaluations on the source 
and permanence of risks, along with the extent to which they can be contained by monetary 4 
 policy, and with a focus on achieving the sustainable price stability target, in a cautious 
manner.  
18. The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken for 
sustainable price and financial stability along with the decline in inflation owi ng to the base 
effect. Accordingly, the Committee has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged.  
19. The cumulative impact s of the recent policy decisions  are closely monitored  and to create a 
foundation for sustainable price stability, a comprehensive policy  framework review is being 
conducted with the aim of prioritizing Turkish lira in all policy tools of the CBRT.  The focus of 
this process  will be on developing policy instruments to support the improvement  of Turkish 
lira deposits, to increase the Turkish lira -denominated assets in the collateral structure of 
OMO funding, to gradually reduce the volume of swaps and to strengthen foreign exchange 
reserves. In formulating the monetary policy towards achieving  the price stability objective, 
the Committee will continue to follow an approach that also addresses risks to financial 
stability.  
20. Accordingly, the effects of Turkish lira liquidity developments on deposits and loan pricing, 
the lagged effects of exchange  rate developments on inflation expectations, and the impact 
of the developments regarding FX -hedged deposit products on reverse currency substitution, 
exchange rate stability and price stability are being analyzed and necessary policy measures 
are being taken . 
21. The CBRT will continue to use decisively all available instruments until strong indicators point 
to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium -term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit 
of the primary objective of price stability.  
22. Stability in th e general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability 
through the fall in country risk premium, continuation of the reversal in currency substitution 
and the upward trend in foreign exchange reserves, and durable decline in fina ncing costs. 
This would create a viable foundation for investment, production and employment to 
continue growing in a healthy and sustainable way.  
23. The Committee supports  building  strong policy coordination and  a holistic macro policy mix 
involving all stak eholders in order to achieve price stability.  
24. The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data -
driven framework.  
 