1 
  
Press Release on Interest Rates  
18 August  2022 No: 2022-35 
 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Şahap Kavcıoğlu (Governor), Taha Çakmak, Mustafa Duman, Elif Haykır Hobikoğlu, Emrah Şener, 
Yusuf Tuna.  
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to reduce the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) from 14 percent to  13 percent.  
The weakening  effect s of geopolitical risks on global economic activity continue to increase . 
Global g rowth forecasts for the upcoming period are be ing revised downwards  and recession is 
increasingly assessed as  an inevitable risk factor . While  the negative consequences of supply 
constraints in some sectors, particularly basic food, have been alleviated by the strategic 
solution s facilitated  by Türkiye, the upward trend in producer and consumer price s continues on 
an international scale . The effects of high global inflation  on inflation expectations and 
international financial markets are closely monitored.  Moreover, central banks in advanced 
economies emphasize  that the rise in inflation may last longer than previously anticipated due to 
rising energy prices , imbalances between supply and demand , and rigidities in labor market s. 
The divergence in monetary p olicy steps and communications of central banks in advanced 
economies continue  due to their diverse economic outlook. It is observed that central banks 
continue  their efforts to develop new supportive  measures  and tools to cope with the increasing 
uncertainties in financial markets .  
Robust growth in the beginning of the year  continue d in the second quarter  as well , with the 
support  of external  demand . Compared to peer  economies , job creation has been stronger . 
Considering the sectors that contribute to  the employment  increase , it is observed  that the 
growth dynamics are supported by structural gains. While share of sustainable components of 
economic growth increases, the stronger than expected contribution of tourism  revenues  to the 
current  account balance continues. On the other hand, high course of energy prices and the 
likelihood of a recession in main trade partners keep the risks on current account balance  alive.  
Sustainable current account balance is important for price stability. The rate of c redit growth  and 
allocation  of funds for real economic activity purposes are closely monitored. In addition, the 
recent increase in  spread between policy  rate and the loan interest rate  is considered to reduce  
the eff ectiveness  of monetary transmission. In this context, t he Committee decided to further 
strengthen the macroprudential policy set with tools supporting  the effectiveness of the 
monetary transmission mechanism .  
Increase in inflation is driven by the lagged and indire ct effects of rising energy costs resulting 
from geopolitical developments, effects of pricing formations that are not supported by 
economic fundamentals, strong negative supply shocks caused by the rise in global energy, food 
and agricultural commodity pr ices. The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the 
back of measures  taken and decisively implemented  for strengthening  sustainable price and 
financial stability along with the resolution of the ongoing regional conflict . Additionally, leading  
indicators for the third quarter point to s ome  loss of momentum in economic activity.  It is 
important that financial condition s remain supportive to preserve the growth momentum in 
2 
 industrial production and the positive trend in employment  in a period of increasing 
uncer tainties regarding global growth as well as escalating geopolitical risk . Accordingly, the 
Committee has decided to reduce the policy rate by 100 basis points , and  has assessed that  the 
updated level of policy rate is adequate  under the current outlook . To create an institutional 
basis for sustainable price stability, the comprehensive review of the policy framework continues 
with the aim of encouraging permanent and strengthened liraization in all policy tools of the 
CBRT . The credit, collateral and liquidity policy actions, of which the review process is finalized, 
will continue to be implemented  to strengthen the effectiveness of the monetary policy 
transmission mechanism.  
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively within the framework of 
liraization strategy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium -
term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the primary object ive of price stability. Stability in 
the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability through the fall 
in country risk premium, continuation of the reversal in currency substitution and the upward 
trend in foreign exchang e reserves, and durable decline in financing costs. This would create a 
viable foundation for investment, production and employment to continue growing in a healthy 
and sustainable way.  
The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, pr edictable and data -driven 
framework.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working 
days.  