Summary of the Monetary Policy
Committee Meeting
1 December 2022, No: 2022-49
Meeting Date: 24 November 2022

Inflation Developments
1. Consumer prices rose by 3.54% in October and annual inflation increased by 2.06 points to
85.51%. In this period, annual inflation receded in energy and alcoholic beverages, tobacco
products and gold groups, but increased in other groups, more markedly in food. While price
increases were widespread across the food group, the rise in the prices of fresh fruits and
vegetables continued in October, becoming the main driver of the increase in the group’s
inflation. Annual core goods inflation was up across all subgroups, while the increase in
annual inflation in clothing and footwear, which saw the effects of the new season, was more
limited compared to other subgroups. In the services group, transportation services came to
the forefront in line with the developments fuel prices as well as rents. Despite the hikes in
fuel and municipal water prices, annual energy inflation declined. Having decreased
somewhat in recent months, global natural gas prices remained still elevated and continued
to negatively affect domestic energy prices. As a matter of fact, domestic producer prices
rose further in October due to contributions from electricity generation and gas production
sectors. Against this background, seasonally-adjusted monthly changes in B and C indices
decelerated slightly, while their annual inflation continued to rise.
2. Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 6.00 points to 99.05%. While
price increases were wide-spread across the group, annual inflation went up by 9.85 points to
92.24% in unprocessed food, and by 2.42 points to 105.32% in processed food. Seasonallyadjusted data indicated that the increase in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables in the
unprocessed food group persisted in October. In addition to fresh fruits and vegetables, the
prices of eggs, nuts, rice, milk and red meat had an effect on the increase of prices in the
unprocessed food subgroup. In the processed food subgroup, the increasing trend in the
prices of bread and cereals persisted, with cheese and other dairy products, sugar-related
products and canned vegetables were the other subitems that came to the forefront.
3. Energy prices were up by 2.37% in October, and annual inflation in this group fell by 4.92
points to 128.06%. The October price increase in the energy group was mainly driven by fuel
prices, which rose by 3.15% in line with the rise in international crude oil prices. Municipal
water, which posted a price hike of 7.17% due to the carry-over effects from the previous
month, and solid fuels, whose prices rose by 2.19%, were the other items that stood out.
Meanwhile, following the decline in international propane and butane prices, bottled gas
prices fell by 1.69% and limited the increase of prices in the group.
4. Services prices were up by 2.63% in October, and the group's annual inflation increased by
2.48 points to 60.24%. In this period, annual inflation increased across all subgroups, most
visibly in transport services and rents, as in September. The monthly increase in rents was
4.87%, pushing annual inflation in this subgroup up to 41.24%. Seasonally-adjusted data
indicate that the monthly increase in the rent subgroup declined slightly compared to the
1

previous month, yet remained high. Developments in fuel prices caused transport services
prices to increase by 1.97%. Annual inflation in this subgroup rose by 4.22 points to 102.20%
driven by urban passenger transport by bus as well as passenger transport by air.
Developments in the restaurants-hotels subgroup were led by catering services in line with
the food inflation outlook. Prices in other services were shaped mainly by various
maintenance-repair, health services, recreation-culture items, and transportation insurance.
5. Annual inflation in core goods rose by 2.16 points to 79.65% in October. Prices of durable
goods rose by 2.57% in October, which was driven predominantly by white goods prices.
Thus, annual inflation in this subgroup climbed by 2.51 points to 92.47%. With visible effects
of the new season, annual inflation in the clothing and footwear group increased by 1.01
points to 40.63%. Price hikes spread across the other core goods group, with personal care
products and household-related cleaning materials still in the lead. Prices rose by 2.96% in
this subgroup, and annual inflation increased by 2.64 points to 85.38%. Meanwhile, the tax
base arrangement introduced to automobiles is expected to pull down the prices of
automobiles in a certain segment in December, and affect the group's inflation positively.
6. According to the November results of the Survey of Market Participants, inflation
expectations increased to some extent for the short term, but decreased for the long term.
12-month ahead inflation expectations rose slightly by 0.13 points to 37.47%. On the other
hand, 24-month ahead and 5-year ahead inflation expectations receded by 0.41 points to
20.76% and 0.17 points to 9.49%, respectively.

Factors Affecting Inflation and Risks
7. The weakening effects of geopolitical risks on global economic activity continue to increase.
Global growth forecasts for the upcoming period are being revised downwards and recession
is increasingly assessed as an inevitable risk factor.
8. While the negative consequences of supply constraints in some sectors, particularly basic
food, have been alleviated by the strategic solutions facilitated by Türkiye, the upward trend
in producer and consumer prices continues on an international scale. The effects of high
global inflation on inflation expectations and international financial markets are closely
monitored. Moreover, central banks in advanced economies emphasize that the rise in
inflation may last longer than previously anticipated due to high level of energy prices,
imbalances between supply and demand, and rigidities in labor markets. The divergence in
monetary policy steps and communications of central banks in advanced economies
continues to increase due to their diverse economic outlook. It is observed that central banks
continue their efforts to develop new supportive measures and tools to cope with the
increasing uncertainties in financial markets.
9. Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets saw inflows in
November parallel to the improved global risk appetite. On the other hand, the volatility in
the long-term bond yields in advanced economies and the course of global financial
conditions keep the risks to portfolio flows to emerging economies alive.
10. Due to the impact of the policy steps taken within the scope of the Liraization Strategy,
Türkiye's Turkish lira-denominated government bond yields, especially in long maturities,
performed more favorably in this period compared to peer economies.
11. Increase in inflation is driven by the lagged and indirect effects of rising energy costs resulting
from geopolitical developments, effects of pricing formations that are not supported by
economic fundamentals, strong negative supply shocks caused by the rise in global energy,
food and agricultural commodity prices.

2

12. In October, international commodity prices displayed a limited increase. Recently, the
pressure on commodity markets has eased due to the weakening trend in global demand
conditions that has become more manifest. Excluding energy, commodity prices slightly
decreased in October. In crude oil markets, where a volatile course prevails, prices have
increased as a result of supply-side decisions. Thanks to favorable stock developments, price
movements in international natural gas prices have been more moderate. In addition to
these developments, the decreasing trend in international transportation costs continues. On
the other hand, despite the recent easing, the lagged effects of the cumulative cost increase
in energy prices continue to affect domestic prices. As a matter of fact, the lagged effects of
the rise in natural gas prices were reflected on domestic industrial energy tariffs in October,
and rising energy costs had widespread effects on producer prices. An analysis of
developments in producer prices by sectors reveals that following the price adjustments in
electricity and natural gas prices, prices in the electricity-gas-steam and air conditioning and
crude oil-natural gas sectors increased significantly and prices of clothing, refined petroleum
products, non-metallic mineral products related to construction and beverages sectors
displayed a noteworthy increase. Despite the energy-related developments, the seasonallyadjusted underlying trend indicators of producer prices pointed out that the cost-based
pressures continued, albeit at a weaker rate.
13. A strong growth was observed in the first half of 2022. Leading indicators for the second half
of the year continue pointing to a slowdown in growth due to the weakening foreign demand.
In September, industrial production adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects decreased by
1.6% quarter-on-quarter against a 0.4% rise on an annual basis. Thus, having increased by
1.8% and 0.8% on a quarterly basis in the first two quarters, industrial production decreased
by 4.1% in the third quarter. In this period, the quarterly decline in industrial production
spread across all manufacturing sectors except vehicles. While the retail sales volume index
and credit card spending continued to increase in the third quarter, their growth momentum
decelerated on a quarterly basis.
14. Pressures on the manufacturing industry due to foreign demand and their currently limited
impact on domestic demand and supply capacity have been more pronounced. In addition to
industrial production realizations, survey-based indicators such as Business Tendency Survey,
PMI and sectoral confidence indices as well as other high-frequency data point that the
slowdown in economic activity continues. Registered domestic and external orders and
future order expectations of manufacturing industry firms reveals an ongoing weakening in
total demand, which is more pronounced for external demand. In the third quarter, firms'
investment expectations remained flat while employment expectations decreased compared
to the previous quarter. Information obtained from field interviews conducted in this quarter
also confirm this outlook for the economic activity.
15. In the third quarter, quarterly employment growth slowed down in line with the deceleration
in economic activity. In the same period, seasonally adjusted labor participation rate
decreased by 0.4 points. On a monthly basis, the unemployment rate increased by 0.3 points
in September compared to the previous month and was realized as 10.1%. Survey indicators
and high-frequency data indicate that, although losing momentum, the upward trend in
employment is maintained. On the other hand, employment gains are more positive
compared to peer economies when the post-pandemic period is examined. When the sectors
that contribute to the increase in employment are considered, it is seen that the growth
dynamics are supported by structural gains.
16. The strong course of energy and gold imports still affects the current account balance
negatively. While the current account balance posted a deficit of USD 3 billion in September,
the annualized current account deficit increased by USD 5.7 billion to USD 39.2 billion. The
3

provisional foreign trade data for October suggest that the deceleration in exports continues.
Having posted a slowdown excluding energy and gold, imports, on the other hand, have
maintained their strength due to the high level of energy and gold imports. Despite the
increase in the foreign trade deficit led by the surge in commodity prices, mainly energy
prices, the ongoing uptrend in services revenues continues to support the current account
balance. While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, the stronger
than expected contribution of tourism revenues to the current account balance continues.
On the other hand, the high course of energy prices and the likelihood of a recession in main
trade partners keep the risks on current account balance alive. Sustainable current account
balance is important for price stability.

Monetary Policy
17. The monetary policy stance will be determined by taking into account the evaluations on the
source and permanence of risks, along with the extent to which they can be contained by
monetary policy, and with a focus on achieving the sustainable price stability target, in a
cautious manner.
18. In formulating the monetary policy towards achieving the sustainable price stability objective,
a liraization-oriented approach will be maintained that also addresses risks to financial
stability. The rate of credit growth and allocation of funds for real economic activity purposes
are closely monitored. In addition, the spread between the policy rate and loan interest rates
driven by the announced macroprudential measures is closely monitored.
19. The Committee will continue to decisively use the tools supporting the effectiveness of the
monetary transmission mechanism and implement additional measures. In this framework,
targets encouraging conversion to Turkish lira deposits under the Liraization Strategy have
been fulfilled, and starting from the end of the year, commission rates applicable to required
reserves for banks’ foreign currency deposits will be varied according to targets regarding
Turkish lira deposit shares only.
20. The Committee expects the disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken and
decisively implemented for strengthening sustainable price and financial stability along with
the resolution of the ongoing regional conflict. The effects of slowing foreign demand on
aggregate demand conditions and production are closely monitored. It is critically important
that financial conditions remain supportive for the sustainability of structural gains in supply
and investment capacity by preserving the growth momentum in industrial production and
the positive trend in employment in a period of increasing uncertainties regarding global
growth as well as further escalation of geopolitical risks.
21. The Committee assessed that the financing costs of companies’ production-oriented activities
should be set at reasonable levels in order to minimize the probable effects of
aforementioned global uncertainties and risks on investment and production capacity via a
proactive approach, thereby maintaining the supply continuity and the current surplus
capacity. Accordingly, the Committee has decided to reduce the policy rate by 150 basis
points. Considering the increasing risks regarding global demand, the Committee evaluated
that the current policy rate is adequate and decided to end the rate cut cycle that started in
August.
22. To create an institutional basis for sustainable price stability, the comprehensive review of
the policy framework continues with the aim of encouraging permanent and strengthened
liraization in all policy tools of the CBRT. The focus of this process will be on developing policy
instruments to support the improvement of Turkish lira deposits, to increase Turkish lira-

4

denominated assets in the collateral structure of OMO funding, to gradually reduce the
volume of swaps, and to strengthen foreign exchange reserves.
23. The credit, collateral and liquidity policy actions, of which the review process has been
finalized, will continue to be implemented to strengthen the effectiveness of the monetary
policy transmission mechanism. The rise in the demand for long-term, fixed-income and
Turkish lira-denominated assets and the course of the yield curve in tandem with the
direction of the efficiency of monetary transmission are closely monitored. Along with credit
growth, the Committee will also consider the improvement in financing costs of loans
providing efficiency gains in targeted areas so as to maintain the transmission.
24. Accordingly, the effects of liquidity and distribution developments of the Turkish lira on
deposits and loan pricing, the effects of exchange rate developments on inflation, and the
impact of the developments regarding FX-protected deposit products on reverse currency
substitution, the depth and stability of the foreign exchange market, and price stability are
being analyzed, and necessary policy measures are being taken.
25. The comprehensive set of policies to be implemented to boost the effectiveness of the
monetary transmission mechanism will be published in the 2023 Monetary and Exchange
Rate Policy document in December.
26. The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively within the framework of
Liraization Strategy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the
medium- term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price
stability.
27. Stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability
through the fall in country risk premium, continuation of the reversal in currency substitution
and the upward trend in foreign exchange reserves, and durable decline in financing costs.
This would create a viable foundation for investment, production and employment to
continue growing in a healthy and sustainable way.
28. The Committee supports building strong policy coordination and a holistic macro policy mix
involving all stakeholders in order to achieve price stability.
29. The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and datadriven framework.

5

