1 
  
Summary of the Monetary Policy 
Committee Meeting   
24 February 2022, No: 202 2-16  
Meeting Date : 17 February 2022  
Inflation Developments  
1. In January, consumer prices increased by 11.10%, and annual inflation increased by 12.61 
points to 48.69%. While exchange rates were more stable in January, international 
commodity prices significantly increased led by the energy group. While price increases in the 
food group spread across the en tire group, fresh fruit and vegetable prices, which had been 
displaying a more moderate course recently, diverged negatively in January. The high course 
of international commodity prices and the ongoing supply problems led to a significant rise in 
producer  prices. Against this background, the rise in annual inflation and  in the recent 
underlying trends of the B and C indices continued in January . 
2. In January, prices of food and non -alcoholic beverages increased by 10.90%, and the group's 
annual inflation ros e by 11.81 points to 55.61%. Due to fresh fruits and vegetables, annual 
inflation in the unprocessed food subgroup increased by 15.15 points to 54.98%, while 
annual inflation in processed food increased by 8.63 points to 56.20%. Prices in the fresh 
fruits and vegetables sub -group, which increased by 20.82% in January, exceeded seasonal 
averages. In the other unprocessed food subgroup, prices of milk and pulses items displayed 
remarkable increases while in the processed food group, cereal products, cheese an d other 
dairy products, and fats and oils were the leading items. The VAT rate on basic food items 
was reduced from 8% to 1% in the middle of the month, thus, the effect of the discount will 
be reflected on the consumer price index in February and March.  
3. While energy prices increased by 27.41% in January, the group's annual inflation increased by 
33.45 points to 76.38%. This rise was driven by developments in international energy 
commodity prices and administered items. As a result of the rise in internatio nal crude oil 
prices and the increase in SCT amounts, fuel prices increased by 23.35%. In January, 
residential electricity and natural gas tariffs increased by 69.96% and 21.35%, respectively, 
and municipal water tariffs also increased by 11.87%. Meanwhile , bottled gas prices 
increased by 11.28%. In this period, secondary effects of the rise in energy costs, particularly 
electricity, were also observed on consumer prices. While fuel prices continued to increase in 
February, the change introduced in grading in residential electricity tariffs and reductions in 
municipal water tariffs will positively affect energy prices in the near future.  
4. In January, annual core goods inflation increased by 7.94 points to 48.49%. Annual inflation 
rose  in all subgroups. Prices  of durable goods increased by 6.43%, and the group's annual 
inflation surged by 7.31 points to 56.24%. While white goods and furniture items stood out 
with high price increases, automobile prices displayed a more limited rise with the 
contribution of the tax base adjustment. A widespread rise was observed in other core goods 
prices and annual inflation rose to 51.23%. As seasonal sales in the clothing and footwear 
subgroups remained quite limited this year, the gradual uptrend in annual inflation 
continued  in this subgroup.  
2 
 5. Services prices rose by 7.89% in January, and annual services inflation increased by 7.23 
points to 29.56%. While the uptick in annual inflation spread across the group, rises were 
more notable in subcategories excluding rent and commun ication. Items with administered 
prices and time -dependent pricing behavior stood out in January. Prices in the restaurants -
hotels subcategory rose by 8.45% and annual inflation hit 50.40%. Also standing out in this 
period, prices in transportation service s rose by 16.88%, and annual inflation became 39.31%. 
Following the recent developments in fuel prices and the high levels of inflation, significant 
increases were recorded in administered prices of intracity transport and passenger 
transport by railway as  well as in cargo charges and road and air passenger transport fares. 
Among other services, health services that have a high backward -looking pricing tendency as 
well as maintenance -repair, recreation and culture, and insurance services were other items 
that pushed up prices. Seasonally -adjusted data suggest that the uptrend in rent inflation 
accelerated.  
6. Prices of alcoholic beverages and tobacco products increased by 21.90% in January. While the 
PPI increase pertaining to the second half of 2021 was reflec ted in specific taxes, producer 
prices -driven increases were also seen in alcoholic beverages. Against this background, 
annual inflation in this group reached 45.34%, adding 1.21 points to the increase in annual 
headline inflation in January.  
7. According to the February results of the Survey of Market Participants, the current year -end 
inflation expectation rose by 4.31 points to 34.06%, while the 12 -month ahead inflation 
expectation dropped by 0.54 points to 24.83%. On the other hand, the upward revisions in  
the long -term inflation expectations continued in February, and the five -year ahead inflation 
expectation increased by 0.13 points to 9.05%.  
Factors Affecting Inflation and Risks  
8. Leading indicators show that the robust recovery in the global economy is su stained, albeit 
with some deceleration. Despite the recovery in global economic activity and the increase in 
the vaccination rate,  the variants and increasing geopolitical risks keep the downside risks to 
global economic activity alive and increase the unc ertainty.   
9. Recovery in global demand, high course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some 
sectors, particular ly in energy, and high transportation costs have led to producer and 
consumer price increases internationally. The effects of high global i nflation on inflation 
expectations and international financial markets are closely monitored. Moreover, central 
banks in advanced economies assess that the rise in inflation may last longer than previously 
anticipated due to rising energy prices and imbala nces between supply and demand. 
Accordingly, while monetary policy communication of central banks in advanced economies 
varies with their diverse outlook for economic activity, labor market and inflation 
expectations, they still continue their supportive m onetary stances and asset purchase 
programs.  
10. The recent recovery in portfolio flows to emerging economies continues. However, the 
volatility in long -term bond rates in advanced economies and the course of global financial 
conditions keep the risks to portf olio flows to emerging economies alive. The impact of such 
risks through the portfolio flows channel towards Turkey is judged to prove to be relatively 
limited, considering the current levels of non -residents’ portfolio positions.  
11. Increase in inflation in the recent period has been driven by pricing formations that are not 
supported by economic fundamentals, supply -side factors such as the rise in global energy, 
food and agricultural commodity prices, supply constraints, and demand developments.  3 
 12. Annual prod ucer inflation maintained its upward trend in January. While prices were up 
across all sectors, the underlying trend of the manufacturing industry excluding oil and base 
metals rose. Annual inflation increased across all main industrial groups, most notabl y in 
energy and intermediate goods. The most dramatic monthly increase was recorded in 
durable consumption goods. The negative outlook for commodity prices, energy in particular, 
ongoing supply chain disruptions, and high transportation costs were the fact ors exerting 
pressure on producer prices. With especially energy and non -energy commodity (metal and 
agriculture in particular) prices posting a substantial increase in US dollar terms in January, 
external price pressures remained strong .  
13. Level of capacit y utilization and other leading indicators show that domestic economic activity 
remains strong, with the help of robust external demand.  Adjusted for seasonal and calendar 
effects, the Industrial Production Index (IPI) increased by 1.6% month -on-month and by 4.3% 
quarter -on-quarter in December, indicating that production continued to grow at an even 
stronger pace in the fourth quarter of the year. Industrial production grew by 16.4% 
throughout 2021. Industrial turnover indices suggest that both external and  domestic 
demand were robust in the last quarter.  Despite a month -on-month decline in that period, 
the retail sales volume index remained strong above its trend throughout the quarter.   
14. High-frequency data indicate that the natural gas and electricity out ages in the last ten days 
of January had a limited impact on production and foreign trade indicators. Meanwhile, 
investment tendencies of manufacturing industry firms for the next twelve months were high 
in January.  Despite the recent upsurge in new cases,  the spread of  vaccination throughout 
domestic population  allows the  services, tourism and related sectors, which have been 
adversely affected by the pandemic, to maintain their strength and leads to a more balanced 
composition in economic activity. As a m atter of fact, the credit card spending in services 
sectors that are severely hit by the pandemic continued to hover above the trend.  
15. The improvement in the labor market continues in line with the economic activity outlook. In 
December, the seasonally adju sted unemployment rate was 11.2%. Employment grew across 
all sectors, and the labor force participation rate increased. Survey indicators and high -
frequency data suggest that the improvement in the employment outlook and the positive 
course in the labor ma rket continue.   
16. The strong course of energy imports in the recent period has been limiting the improvement 
in the current account balance. The current account balance ran a deficit of USD 3.8 billion in 
December, and the current account deficit for 2021 st ood at USD 14.9 billion. While exports 
remained strong thanks to favorable external demand conditions in the last quarter of the 
year, imports increased due to robust economic activity, the rise in commodity, particularly 
energy prices and the increase in energy demand.  The real balancing in foreign trade 
excluding price effects continued. Provisional foreign trade data suggest that the energy -
driven increase in imports will persist in January. Despite this outlook in the foreign trade 
balance, the favorab le course in services revenues continues to support the current account 
balance.  While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, current 
account balance is expected to post a surplus in 2022. Strengthening of the improving trend 
in curr ent account balance is important for price stability. The Committee assesses that 
extending long -term Turkish lira investment credit will play a significant role in achieving this 
target.  
Monetary Policy  
17. The monetary policy stance will be set by taking int o account the evaluations on the source 
and permanence of risks, along with the extent to which they can be contained by monetary 4 
 policy, and with a focus on achieving the sustainable price stability target, in a cautious 
manner.  
18. The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken and 
decisively pursued for sustainable price and financial stability along with the decline in 
inflation owing to the base effect.  Accordingly, the Committee has decided to keep the policy 
rate un changed.   
19. While cumulative impact of the recent policy decisions is being monitored, to create a 
foundation for sustainable price stability, the comprehensive review of the policy framework 
is being conducted with the aim of encouraging permanent liraizati on in all policy tools of the 
CBRT.  The focus of this process will be on developing policy instruments to support the 
improvement of Turkish lira deposits, to increase the Turkish lira -denominated assets in the 
collateral structure of OMO funding, to gradu ally reduce the volume of swaps and to 
strengthen foreign exchange reserves. In formulating the monetary policy towards achieving 
the sustainable  price stability objective, the Committee will continue to follow a liraization 
oriented approach that also add resses risks to financial stability.  
20. Accordingly , the effects of the liquidity and distribution developments of Turkish lira on 
deposits and loan pricing, the lagged effects of exchange rate developments on inflation 
expectations, and the impact of the dev elopments regarding FX -protected  deposit products 
on reverse currency substitution, the de pth and stability of the foreign exchange market  and 
price stability are being analyzed and necessary policy measures are being taken.  
21. The CBRT will continue to use a ll available instruments decisively within the framework of 
liraization strategy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the 
medium -term 5% target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability.   
22. Stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability 
through the fall in country risk premium, continuation of the reversal in currency substitution 
and the upward trend in foreign exchange reserves, and durable decline in fi nancing costs. 
This would create a viable foundation for investment, production and employment to 
continue growing in a healthy and sustainable way.  
23. The Committee supports building strong policy coordination and a holistic macro policy mix 
involving all st akeholders in order to achieve price stability.  
24. The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data -
driven framework.  
 