1 
  
Press Release on Interest Rates  
20 October  2022 No: 2022-42 
 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Şahap Kavcıoğlu (Governor), Taha Çakmak, Mustafa Duman, Elif Haykır Hobikoğlu, Emrah Şener.  
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to reduce the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) from 12 percent to 1 0.5 percent . 
The weakening  effect s of geopolitical risks on global economic activity continue to increase . 
Global g rowth forecasts for the upcoming period are be ing revised downwards  and recession is 
increasingly assessed as  an inevitable risk factor . While  the negative consequences of supply 
constraints in some sectors, particularly basic food, have been alleviated by the strategic 
solution s facilitated  by Türkiye, the upward trend in producer and consumer price s continues on 
an international scale . The effects of high global inflation  on inflation expectations and 
international financial markets are closely monitored.  Moreover, central banks in advanced 
economies emphasize  that the rise in inflation may last longer than previously anticipated due to 
rising energy prices , imbalances between supply and demand , and rigidities in labor market s. 
The divergence in monetary policy steps and communications of central banks in advanced 
economies continue  to increase due to their diverse economic outlook. It is observed that central 
banks continue  their efforts to develop new supportive  measures  and too ls to cope with the 
increasing uncertainties in financial markets .  
A strong growth was observed  in the first half of 2022 . Leading indicators for the second half of 
the year continue point ing to a slowdown in growth due to the weakening foreign demand.  
Pressures on the manufacturing industry due to foreign demand and their currently limited 
impact on domestic  demand  and supply capacity are being monitored closely.  Compared to peer  
economies , job creation has been stronger . Considering the sectors that con tribute to  the 
employment  increase , it is observed  that the growth dynamics are supported by structural gains. 
While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, the stronger than 
expected contribution of tourism  revenues  to the current account balance continues. On the 
other hand, high course of energy prices and the likelihood of a recession in main trade partners 
keep the risks on current account balance  alive.  Sustainable current account balance is important 
for price stabilit y. The rate of c redit growth  and allocation  of funds for real economic activity 
purposes are closely monitored. In addition, the spread between policy  rate and the loan interest 
rates driven by the announced macroprudential measures is closely monitored . The Committee 
will continue  to further strengthen the tools supporting  the effectiveness of the monetary 
transmission mechanism .  
Increase in inflation is driven by the lagged and indirect effects of rising energy costs resulting 
from geopolitical developme nts, effects of pricing formations that are not supported by 
economic fundamentals, strong negative supply shocks caused by the rise in global energy, food 
and agricultural commodity prices. The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the 
back o f measures  taken and decisively implemented  for strengthening  sustainable price and 
financial stability along with the resolution of the ongoing regional conflict . The e ffects of slowing  
foreign demand on aggregate demand conditions and production are closely monitored.  It is 
2 
 critically important that financial condition s remain supportive to preserve the growth 
momentum in industrial production and the positive trend in employment  in a period of 
increasing uncer tainties regarding global growth as well as further escalati on of  geopolitical 
risks. Accordingly, the Committee has decided to reduce the policy rate by 150 basis  points . The 
Committee evaluated taking a similar step in the following meeting and ending the rate cut cycle.  
To create an institutional basis for sustainable price stability, the comprehensive review of the 
policy framework continues with the aim of encouraging permanent and strengthened liraization 
in all policy tools of the CBRT . The credit, collateral and liqui dity policy actions, of which the 
review process is finalized, will continue to be implemented  to strengthen the effectiveness of 
the monetary policy transmission mechanism.  
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively within the framework of 
liraization strategy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium -
term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the primary object ive of price stability. Stability in 
the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability through the fall 
in country risk premium, continuation of the reversal in currency substitution and the upward 
trend in foreign exchang e reserves, and durable decline in financing costs. This would create a 
viable foundation for investment, production and employment to continue growing in a healthy 
and sustainable way.  
The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, pr edictable and data -driven 
framework.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working 
days.  