Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası  
İdare Merkezi  
Hacı Bayram Mah. İstiklal Cad. No:10 06050  
Ulus Altındağ Ankara 0312 507 50 00  
www.tcmb.gov.tr    
Press Release on Security Overlay 
Service (SIPER)  
9 December  2022  No: 2022-50 
 
The Central Bank of the Republic of Türkiye (CBRT) has introduced the “Security Overlay  
Service” (S IPER), a  vital overlay  service for  the Instant and Continuous Transfer of Funds 
(FAST) . SIPER  enables real -time threat intelligence and information sharing for the detecti on 
and prevention of illicit  transactions . The SIPER was developed in cooperation with  the 
Interbank Card Center (BKM) with domestic and national resources . 
 
The FAST System , which allows 24/7/365 instant transfer of funds, was launched in December 
2020. Through the FAST, all users can make cheap  and instant transfer s of funds between their 
accounts at different financial institutions on a 24/7 basis where all the parties are informed 
about the result of the transaction s instantly. As the fund transfer s take place within seconds 
irrevocably, all kinds of security risks have to be managed instantenously. Thus, the CBRT has 
developed and launched the SIPER  platform,  which is a n international best practice,  to ensure 
the most secure conduct and broad -based use of instant payments. The operating principle of 
the SIPER  platf orm is to secure the exchange of any information about the risk of an illecit  
transaction between the initiating and beneficiary institution s within seconds. Also , via the SIPER 
platform, all parties in the system will be  informed  about illicit transactions . The SIPER  is planned 
to be used not only for FAST transactions but also for all kinds of fund transfers.  
Although t he SIPER  has become recently available , four FAST participants  have completed tests 
and technical certifications successfully, and as of today started using the platform. Additionally, 
two others have completed the testing and certification processes to join the SIPER . All the 
participants of the FAST are expected to integ rate to the SIPER  in the first quarter of 20 23. 
In th e ongoing second  phase of the SIPER platform, smart -layered strategic products are 
being developed using “Machine Learning” and “Artificial Intelligence” algorithms, which 
will allow detection of illega l uses as anomalies on the centrally collected data. The CBRT is 
planning to make these products available to all stakeholders in the payment ecosystem 
in the second half of 2023.  
The CBRT evaluates that the SIPER  platform will make a significant contribution to ensuring that 
end users carry out all their digital payment transactions safely  in the payments area of our 
Liraization Strategy , and that illegal use is minimized.  
 
Contact  
For further information, you may send an e -mail to basin@tcmb.gov.tr.  
 