1 
  
Press Release on Interest Rates  
23 June  2022 No: 2022-29 
 
 
Participating Committee Members  
Şahap Kavcıoğlu (Governor), Taha Çakmak, Mustafa Duman, Elif Haykır Hobikoğlu, Emrah Şener,  
Yusuf Tuna.  
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has decided to keep the policy rate (one -week repo 
auction rate) constant at 14 percent.  
The escalat ing geopolitical risks were  adversely realized in the first half of the year and caused a 
weakening in the worldwide  economic activity. Global g rowth forecasts for the upcoming period 
are be ing revised downwards.  Increasing c oncern over global food security  driven by trade 
restrictions , high course of commodity prices, the persistence of supply constraints in some 
sectors , particularly  in food and energy , and high transportation costs have led to producer and 
consumer price increases internationally. The effects of high global inflation on inflation 
expectations and international financial markets are closely m onitored. Moreover, central banks 
in advanced economies emphasize  that the rise in inflation may last longer than previously 
anticipated due to rising energy prices and imbalances between supply and demand.  The 
divergence in monetary policy steps and commu nications of central banks in advanced 
economies increase d due to their diverse economic outlook. It is observed that central banks 
have increased their efforts to develop new supportive  measures  and tools to cope with the 
increasing uncertainties in finan cial markets .  
Level of capacity utilization and other leading indicators show that robust growth in the 
beginning of the year  continues in the second quarter  as well , with the support  of external  
demand . While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases  with tourism -
related improvements , risks on current account balance due to energy prices continue. 
Sustainable current account balance is important for price stability. Credit growth and allocation  
of funds for real economic activity purpo ses are closely monitored. The Committee will continue 
to implement the strengthened macroprudential policy set decisively and take additional 
measures when needed.   
Increase in inflation is driven by rising energy costs resulting from geopolitical develop ments, 
temporary effects of pricing formations that are not supported by economic fundamentals, 
strong negative supply shocks caused by the rise in global energy, food and agricultural 
commodity prices. The Committee expects disinflation process to start o n the back of measures  
taken and decisively implemented  for strengthening  sustainable price and financial stability 
along with the decline in inflation owing to the base effect and the resolution of the ongoing 
regional conflict. Accordingly, the Committee  has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged.  To 
create an institutional basis for sustainable price stability, the comprehensive review of the policy 
framework continues with the aim of encouraging permanent and strengthened liraization  in all 
policy tools of the CBRT . The collateral and liquidity policy actions, of which the review process is 
finalized, will continue to be implemented  to strengthen the effectiveness of the monetary policy 
transmission mechanism.  
2 
 The CBRT will continue t o use all available instruments decisively within the framework of 
liraization strategy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium -
term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability. Stability in 
the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability through the fall 
in country risk premium, continuation of the reversal in currency substitution and the upward 
trend in foreign exchange reserves, and durable decline in financing costs. This would create a 
viable foundation for investment, production and employment to continue growing in a healthy 
and sustainable way.  
The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data -drive n 
framework.  
The summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting will be released within five working 
days.  