Summary of the Monetary Policy
Committee Meeting
24 March 2022, No: 2022-19
Meeting Date: 17 March 2022

Inflation Developments
1. In February, consumer prices increased by 4.81%, and annual inflation rose by 5.75 points to
54.44%. The exchange rate was more stable in February, while the upward trend in
commodity prices became evident following geopolitical developments. The increase in
annual food inflation reflected the developments in international markets. Domestic fuel
prices were adversely affected by the increase in crude oil prices, and this item became the
main driver of energy inflation. In line with the outlook for energy and food, restaurantshotels and transportation pushed services inflation up. In core goods, price increases slowed
down in February but annual inflation continued to rise. Both the developments in
international commodity markets and ongoing supply problems caused producer prices to
soar. Against this background, annual inflation of indicators B and C increased in February.
2. Food and nonalcoholic beverage prices increased by 8.41% in February, and the group's
annual inflation rose by 8.86 points to 64.47%. Annual inflation in unprocessed food
increased by 14.95 points to 69.93%, while annual inflation in processed food increased by
3.22 points to 59.42%. Rising at a rate higher than seasonal averages with 32.16%, prices of
fresh fruits and vegetables were the key driver of the annual unprocessed food inflation in
February. Other unprocessed food items, including red meat, pulses, dried nuts and potatoes
increased notably, while fats and oils, sugar and sugar-related products and grain products in
the processed food group rose significantly as well. International agricultural commodity
prices seem to have a negative impact on these items, directly or indirectly. The VAT
reduction of food items from 8% to 1% in mid-February prevented a more negative outlook,
while leading indicators point to a more positive outlook for the food group in March,
supported by the prolonged effect of the VAT cut.
3. While energy prices rose by 4.00% in February, annual inflation in the energy group increased
by 6.60 points to 82.98%. Recent geopolitical developments led to a global upsurge in prices
of crude oil, natural gas and solid fuel, aggravating the pressure on domestic prices. Against
this background, price hikes were widespread in February, with fuel oil prices soaring notably
by 10.10%. On the other hand, the grading in residential electricity tariffs was adjusted, which
pulled electricity prices down by 4.84%. In addition, the VAT rate was reduced in early March.
Accordingly, electricity prices are expected to decelerate further in March.
4. In February, annual core goods inflation increased by 5.89 points to 54.38%. Annual inflation
has been high across all subgroups in this period. Prices of durable goods increased relatively
mildly by 3.27% compared to previous months, and the annual inflation in this group rose by
4.70 points to 60.94%. Prices of white goods and furniture items increased markedly, while
automobile prices maintained a moderate course. In other core goods, annual inflation
reached 61.89% with an increase of 10.66 points. Price hikes in other core goods were
widespread, with medicine prices stood out due to backward exchange rate indexing. Prices
1

of clothing and footwear registered a slight increase by 0.23% in February, contrary to
seasonal norms, and annual inflation in this subgroup was calculated as 26.55%.
5. Services prices rose by 3.63% in February, and annual services inflation increased by 3.33
points to 32.89%. Annual inflation increased across all subgroups, but more markedly in
transport and hotels-restaurants. Prices in restaurants-hotels increased by 4.54% due to
catering services, and annual inflation reached 55.20%, owing to the increases in the costs of
main inputs such as food and energy. Fuel price changes also had an adverse impact on
transport services led by intercity passenger transport by road and urban passenger
transport by bus. Prices in this group went up by 5.73%, and annual transport inflation rose
to 46.87%. The subgroup of other services also saw widespread price increases, particularly
in health and education services. Seasonally adjusted monthly increases in rent remained
high.
6. According to the March results of the Survey of Market Participants, the current year-end
inflation expectation rose by 6.41 points to 40.47%, while the 12-month-ahead inflation
expectation increased by 1.60 points to 26.43%. On the other hand, long-term inflation
expectations lost its upward momentum in March, and the five-year ahead inflation
expectation dropped by 0.24 points to 8.81%.

Factors Affecting Inflation and Risks
7. Leading indicators show that the robust recovery in the global economy is sustained, albeit
with some deceleration. However, geopolitical risks that evolved into conflict and the
variants, keep the downside risks to regional and global economic activity alive and further
increases the uncertainty.
8. Recovery in global demand, high course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some
sectors that have become more evident particularly in energy, and high transportation costs
have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally. The effects of high global
inflation on inflation expectations and international financial markets are closely monitored.
Moreover, central banks in advanced economies assess that the rise in inflation may last
longer than previously anticipated due to rising energy prices and imbalances between
supply and demand. Accordingly, while monetary policy communication of central banks in
advanced economies varies with their diverse outlook for economic activity, labor market and
inflation expectations, they still continue their supportive monetary stances and asset
purchase programs at a slower pace.
9. Portfolio flows to emerging economies suggest that inflows to equity markets have recently
continued albeit at a slower pace and bond markets have posted outflows. The volatility in
long-term bond rates in advanced economies and the course of global financial conditions
keep the risks to portfolio flows to emerging economies alive. The impact of such risks
through the portfolio flows channel towards Turkey is judged to prove to be relatively limited,
considering the current levels of non-residents’ portfolio positions.
10. Increase in inflation in the recent period has been driven by rising energy costs resulting from
the heightened regional conflict, temporary effects of pricing formations that are not
supported by economic fundamentals, supply side factors such as the rise in global energy,
food and agricultural commodity prices, supply constraints, and demand developments.
11. Despite the mild course in exchange rates, the commodity price increases that became more
evident due to lingering supply-side problems and the geopolitical unrest affected producer
prices negatively in February. While annual inflation increased across all subgroups, the
energy group diverged negatively in line with international developments. Across subgroups,

2

monthly changes were remarkable in electricity-gas production and distribution, crude oilnatural gas, main pharmaceutical, wood and construction related products.
12. Economic activity remained strong in the final quarter of 2021, with the help of both domestic
and external demand. In this period, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) rose by 9.1% on an
annual basis while it increased by 1.5% quarter-on-quarter in seasonally and calendaradjusted terms. Accordingly, overall 2021 growth became 11%. On the production side,
industrial and services sectors were the main drivers of annual and quarterly growth in the
final quarter whereas the construction sector limited growth. On the expenditures side, the
main driver of quarterly growth was final domestic demand led by private consumption while
net exports contributed to quarterly growth by 0.9 points.
13. Level of capacity utilization and other leading indicators show that domestic economic activity
remains strong, with the help of robust external demand even some regional differences
emerge. Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, industrial production declined by 2.4%
month-on-month in January. However, it is assessed that electricity and natural gas outages
in industrial plants in the last ten days of the month were effective in this decline and the
production remains strong when these effects were excluded. In terms of export intensity,
industrial production is stronger than implied by the general index in exporting sectors
excluding other transportation. Industrial turnover indices also reveal that external demand
continued to support industrial production in January. On the other hand, retail sales volume
indices declined also in January, indicating a loss of momentum in domestic demand.
14. High-frequency data suggest that production and foreign trade indicators posted some
recovery in February after registering declines due to natural gas and electricity outages in
January. As of February, investment tendencies of manufacturing industry firms for the next
twelve months were high. Firms’ existing domestic and external orders as well as
expectations for future orders reveal that external demand remains strong while domestic
demand is expected to increase although it has declined slightly. On the other hand, the
credit card spending increased substantially on a monthly basis in February.
15. Developments in the labor market are in tandem with the outlook of economic activity. In
January, employment decreased by a mere 0.1% compared to the previous month. With the
effect of the decrease in the participation rate, seasonally adjusted total unemployment rate
remained unchanged month-on-month and was recorded at 11.4%. Survey indicators and
high-frequency data indicate that the positive outlook in the labor market is maintained.
16. The recent strong course of energy imports has been affecting the current account balance
adversely. While the current account deficit was USD 7.1 billion in January, the annualized
current account deficit increased by USD 5.3 billion to USD 20.2 billion. Provisional foreign
trade data indicated that, the strong course of exports in February continued recently despite
regional differences, while imports increased due to high energy and commodity prices. In
this context, regional losses occur in exports in the short term due to the heightened military
conflict. It is observed that, short-term loses are largely compensated by the increase in
exports to other countries thanks to the dynamic capacity and market diversification
flexibility of the exporting firms. Despite this outlook in the foreign trade balance, the
favorable course in services revenues continues to support the current account balance.
While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, risks on current
account balance due to energy prices are closely monitored. Sustainable current account
balance is important for price stability.

3

Monetary Policy
17. The monetary policy stance will be determined by taking into account the evaluations on the
source and permanence of risks, along with the extent to which they can be contained by
monetary policy, and with a focus on achieving the sustainable price stability target, in a
cautious manner.
18. In formulating the monetary policy towards achieving the sustainable price stability objective,
a liraization- oriented approach that also addresses risks to financial stability will continue to
be followed. The Committee also assesses that credit growth including long-term investment
loans and the targeted use of accessed funds for real economic activity is important for
financial stability.
19. The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken and
decisively pursued for achieving sustainable price and financial stability once global peace is
restored and base effects are ceased. Accordingly, the Committee has decided to keep the
policy rate unchanged.
20. While cumulative impact of the recent policy decisions is being monitored, to create an
institutional basis for sustainable price stability, the comprehensive review of the policy
framework continues with the aim of encouraging permanent and strengthened liraization in
all policy tools of the CBRT. The focus of this process will be on developing policy instruments
to support the improvement of Turkish lira deposits, to increase the Turkish liradenominated assets in the collateral structure of OMO funding, to gradually reduce the
volume of swaps and to strengthen foreign exchange reserves.
21. Accordingly, the effects of the liquidity and distribution developments of Turkish lira on
deposits and loan pricing, the lagged effects of exchange rate developments on inflation
expectations, and the impact of the developments regarding FX-protected deposit products
on reverse currency substitution, the depth and stability of the foreign exchange market and
price stability are being analyzed and necessary policy measures are being taken.
22. The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively within the framework of
liraization strategy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the
medium-term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price
stability.
23. Stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability
through the fall in country risk premium, continuation of the reversal in currency substitution
and the upward trend in foreign exchange reserves, and durable decline in financing costs.
This would create a viable foundation for investment, production and employment to
continue growing in a healthy and sustainable way.
24. The Committee supports building strong policy coordination and a holistic macro policy mix
involving all stakeholders in order to achieve price stability.
25. The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and datadriven framework.

4

